PENNSTATE

| 2 ve Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
212 Sackett Building
University Park, PA 16802
CE 438 — CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CAPSTONE DESIGN

Instructor: Edward J. Gannon, P.E., PhD, LEED AP
113 A Physical Plant Building
206C Sackett Building
814-883-5214 cell

email: ejg3@psu.edu

Texts: Construction, Planning, Equipment, and Methods, Peurifoy, Schexnayder, Shapira,
7" Edition

Additional required readings and supplemental materials will be posted in ANGEL.

Prerequisites: CE 432, C E435 or CE 436
Time & Place: MWF 2:30-3:20 P.M. 265 Willard Building

Course Description
This Construction Project capstone design course is intended to establish the foundation for

organizational and procedural understanding in construction engineering. The student will gain the
knowledge necessary to apply engineering principles in analyzing economical approaches to construction
problems.

This course will cover construction methods, equipment, and cost estimation of construction materials,
excavation, foundation, retaining walls, formwork, pavements and other aspects of civil engineering
construction projects by integrating geotechnical reports, materials specifications, quality control,
equipment, estimation, scheduling, and design details.

Course Content

This course is focused on building upon your existing knowledge of construction, geotechnical and
materials engineering. There will be a series of assignments and projects that will enhance your current
level of knowledge.

Selected topics will be chosen for detailed lectures as given below. The lectures may not be held in the exact
order listed, but will be ordered to supplement the capstone project. The number of lectures on each topic
may vary slightly, to accommodate student and project background and needs. Lecture topics may be
deleted, modified or added at the discretion of the lecturer.

Syllabus Spring 2011
Page 1 of 3

PENNSTATE

| 2 ve Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
212 Sackett Building
University Park, PA 16802
CE 438 — CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CAPSTONE DESIGN

Topics to be Explored
Project Deliver Methods Review

Integrated Project Delivery (IPD)

Lean Construction

Building Information Modeling (BIM)
Green Building and Construction (LEED)
Concrete Formwork

Modular Construction

Risk Assessment

Safety and OSHA

Project Contract Documents

Quality Assurance and Quality Control
Temporary Site Construction

Ethics and Professionalism
Engineering Economics Review
Earthwork and Excavation

Site Logistics

Equipment Costs and Performance
Drilling and Blasting

Foundations

Planned Course Outcomes
Students enrolled in C E 438W should gain or enrich:
e An ability to design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs
e An ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams
e An ability to communicate effectively
e An understanding of professional and ethical responsibility
e A knowledge of contemporary issues
e A recognition of the need for, and an ability to engage in life-long learning

Specific Course Goals and Objectives

e Expand knowledge and understanding of construction engineering within the framework of a
realistic major design/construction project

e Advance proficiency with use of specifications, bid documents, planning and scheduling tools,
estimating tools, site investigation techniques

e Apply project management process and procedures, geotechnical, pavement and materials
design and constructability techniques

e Develop an appreciation for the role of professional and ethical responsibility in engineering
and construction management practice

Syllabus Spring 2011
Page 2 of 3

PENNSTATE

| 2 ve Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
212 Sackett Building
University Park, PA 16802

CE 438 — CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CAPSTONE DESIGN

Grading: Homework 20 %
Mini-exams/quizzes 10%
Process and Equipment Diaries 20 %
Group Project(s) 50%

Additional course information:
Homework assignments will be given in class with no written description; it is your responsibility to take
proper notes. If you have any questions, ask. All assignments are due at the start of the class period.
Scores on late homework assignments will be reduced. Prepare all homework solutions and projects ina
professional manner. No late project submissions will be accepted.

Lecture notes will be posted on ANGEL.

Class attendance is critical to the successful completion of this course; attendance will be checked
periodically and used as part of the student’s grade. All students must actively participate in class .

Final letter grades in the course will be assigned as follows:

93.0< A <100 80.0< B- <83.0 F <60.0
90.0< A <93.0 77.0< C+ <80.0
87.0< B+ < 90.0 70.0< C <77.0
83.0< B <87.0 60.0<D <70.0

Academic Integrity

Students are expected to uphold the highest academic integrity. Any deviation will result in disciplinary
measures consistent with University policies, including a grade of zero points for that assignment and
potentially a failing grade in the class.

Please consult the policies at http://www.engr.psu.edu/CurrentStudents/acadinteg.asp

Writing Across the Curriculum

Developing the skill to communicate by means of the written word is extremely important.

This course has been designated as a "W" courses and it will include writing assignments that relate
clearly to the course objectives and serve as effective instruments for learning the subject matter of the
course. These assignments are designed to help students investigate the course subject matter, gain
experience in interpreting data or the results of research, shape writing for a particular audience, or
practice the type of writing associated with a given profession or discipline. It is highly recommended
that the student make use of writing and learning centers.

Syllabus Spring 2011
Page 3 of 3

