ΝΨ Capstone Design Syllabus
Course Overview
Engineering design integrates mathematics, natural sciences, engineering sciences, and
complementary studies in order to develop elements, systems, and processes to meet specific
needs. It is a creative, iterative, and open-ended process, subject to constraints which may be
governed by standards or legislation to varying degrees depending upon the discipline. These
constraints may also relate to economic, health, safety, environmental, societal
or other interdisciplinary factors.
􁻙
The engineering curriculum must culminate in a significant design experience … based on the
knowledge and skills acquired in earlier work and it preferably gives students an involvement
in team work and project management. (Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board
Accreditation Criteria and Procedures 2010, Canadian Council of Professional Engineers,
sections 3.3.3.3 and 3.3.4.4.)
The Engineering Science Capstone Design course provides students in different Majors, specifically
Biomedical, Electrical and Computer, Nanoengineering, and Physics, with an opportunity to integrate and
apply the technical knowledge gained during their undergraduate education to the solution of a given realworld
engineering design challenge. Students work in small groups1, and have significant latitude to explore
and define the given challenge. There are no technical lectures or tutorials in Capstone Design; students are
expected to have sufficient technical background that they can successfully address the design challenge
with some minimal additional self-study.
The design challenge for the 20119 session of Engineering Science Capstone Design is:
Design, or redesign, an experiment for, or from, the
Engineering Science undergraduate curriculum
Each Capstone Design team will (re)design, prototype, and test a working laboratory experiment. Teams are
expected to develop both the experiment itself, including all supporting apparatus and equipment,
documentation, learning objectives, etc., and a full set of engineering documentation that substantiates their
design. The designs produced in Capstone Design must be developed into functioning products
suitable for immediate deployment in the classroom or laboratory. In addition to their team
activities, each Capstone Design student is individually expected to provide evidence of reflective activities
completed during the course.
Course Instructors
Jun Nogami (WB140)
jun.nogami@utoronto.ca
Co-instructor: TBA
Given the highly varying nature of upper year student schedules, in lieu of scheduled office hours students
who desire additional contact time must make individual appointments with the Course Instructors. During
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20129
1 Students may choose the composition of their teams to suit their interests and skills. While we recommend
that teams have members from multiple Majors, this recommendation will not be mandated.
the term the Course Instructors may announce one or more scheduled times and locations where individuals
or groups of students may obtain additional contact.
Graduate Attributes
Having completed ESC471 Engineering Science Capstone Design all student are expected to have
demonstrated that they possess the abilities and understandings linked to the following CEAB graduate
attributes2:
3.1.3 Investigation
3.1.4 Design
3.1.5 Engineering tools
3.1.6 Teamwork
3.1.7 Communication skills
3.1.8 Professionalism
3.1.10 Ethics and equity
3.1.11 Economics and project management
3.1.12 Lifelong Learning
Prerequisites
There are no formal prerequisites for Capstone Design beyond having completed the Engineering Science
Foundation curriculum and one year of an Engineering Science Major. As part of their Foundation studies,
all students in Capstone Design are expected to have engaged in the design of structures3, circuits4, software
programs5, socio-technical systems6, and other forms of engineering. They are also expected to be familiar
with engineering design as a distinct topic of study7. Informal prerequisites include having completed
laboratory experiments as part of a course, and the use of analytic and simulation tools such as Matlab and
Labview.
Capstone Design builds on the Praxis Approach to Engineering Design Education introduced in the
Engineering Science Foundation Curriculum. Accordingly students are expected to be aware of this approach
and to use it as the basis of their Capstone Design activities. Key features of this approach include:
• Having students make and defend design decisions;
• Encouraging students to explore and question the activities and assignments they are asked to
undertake;
• Exposing students to multiple conceptions of “engineering” and “design” and having students develop
their own, individualized conception of “engineering design” that guides their practice;
• Expecting students to undertake their own investigations and to explore alternate perspectives
and approaches to the materials they are presented; and,
• Having the students responsible for integrating theory and practice, supported by the
instructional team.
The Praxis Approach to Engineering Design Education has as core theoretical underpinnings the Perry
Model of Intellectual and Ethical Development and the Kolb Learning Cycle. Students are encouraged to
explore these models to better understand the philosophy of the Capstone Design course.
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20119
Syllabus [2/7]
2 Further information on the CEAB Graduate Attributes can be found at:
http://www.engineerscanada.ca/e/files/Accreditation_Criteria_Procedures_2010.pdf
3 In CIV102 and possibly in ESC101.
4 In AER201 and possibly in ECE159 and ECE253.
5 In either CSC192 or in the combination of CSC180 and CSC190, and possibly in AER201.
6 In ESC102 and possibly in ESC201.
7 From ESC101, ESC102, AER201, and possible ESC201.
Resources
Capstone Design makes use of a number of electronic resources:
Blackboard: available through http://portal.utoronto.ca
There is no textbook for Capstone Design; any required readings will be made available electronically as the
course progresses. Links to these readings will be made available on the Blackboard site.
Students are required to develop functional, and optionally non-functional, prototypes of their Capstone
designs. To support these efforts, students will be reimbursed for their purchases and will have access to
machine shop services. To receive reimbursement or gain access to machine shop services, students
must obtain prior approval from both the course instructors and from a designated authority.
Students may also choose to engage in activities that have associated costs, for example having posters
printed on large format paper or producing bound, colour copy reports, Students in Capstone Design are
expected to spend an amount similar to the cost of a textbook over the course of the term without expectation
of compensation.
As much as possible, assessment will be structured so that the grade and the level of expenditure will not
be correlated, allowing students to choose their own level of expenditure. Students should consult with the
Course Instructors should they feel that the costs of the course are becoming excessive.
Activities and Workload
Design Studios (“Practical”; 5 scheduled hours per week)
Studios are designed as weekly opportunities for group work and consultation with the Course Instructors.
Portions of certain Studios will be used for structured activities including discussions with subject matter
experts, presentations by guest speakers, demonstrations, and class discussions. We do not anticipate
using the full 5 scheduled hours and will accommodate students with scheduling conflicts.
Workload
The nominal expectation is that students spend one hour outside of class for every one hour of classroom
time. On a weekly basis this translates to five hours per student per week. Note that is a nominal, average
expectation; in any particular week, and for any particular student, the actual amount of time spent on the
course may differ from this expectation.
Course Feedback
Over the course of the term, students may be requested to provide feedback on the course. This feedback
may be solicited by the Division of Engineering Science or the Course Instructors. Any such feedback will be
used to improve the course, during both this and future sessions. While students are not required to respond
to the requests for feedback, they are encouraged to do so as their feedback can significantly improve both
their course experience and that of future students. Should feedback be requested, student anonymity will be
preserved unless the student explicitly chooses to share their identity with the Course Instructors.
Preliminary Timeline
Note that with the exception of the due dates for assignments, this timeline is subject to change. See the
“Composition of Final Grades” section for specific due dates and time.
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20119
Syllabus [3/7]
Date Session Studio Activities
2012-09-10 1 Course Introduction / Team Formation / Problem Assignment /
Field Trip
2012-09-17 2 ESC471 20119 Post-Mortem / Proposal Formation
2012-09-24 3 Critique of Project Proposals with Course Instructors
2012-10-01 4 Team Dynamics and Performance, meetings with Course Instructors
2012-10-8 No scheduled ESC471 activities (Thanksgiving)
2012-10-15 5 Pre-critique of Preliminary Designs with the Course Instructors
2012-10-22 6 Critique of Preliminary Designs
2012-10-29 7 Scheduled meetings with the Course Instructors
2012-11-05 8 Pre-critique of Final Designs with the Course Instructors
2012-11-12 9 Critique of Final Designs / Final Grade Category Allocation
2012-11-19 10 Scheduled meetings with the Course Instructors
2012-11-26 11 Course Evaluations
2011-12-03 12 Scheduled meetings with the Course Instructors
Grading Policies
Composition of Final Grades
The deliverables associated with a design activity can be broken down into three categories: product, process,
and reflection. To provide students with the flexibility to pursue their own learning goals, in Capstone
Design each student team is able to select what percentage of their overall grade is allocated to each of those
categories. The allocation must sum to 100% while meeting the following restrictions:
Category Definition Min. Max.
Product Final deliverables and accompanying descriptions. Examples include
experimental apparatus, laboratory protocols, technical specifications, WHMIS
sheets, schematics, etc.
Product deliverables focus on answering the question “What is the design?”
35% 55%
Process Process deliverables frame, explain, and justify the product. Examples include
problem definitions, stakeholder needs assessments, multi-criteria decision
making, proposed future changes, etc.
Process deliverables focus on answering the question “Why is this a credible
engineering design?”
35% 55%
Reflection Reflection deliverables demonstrate individual changes in knowledge, practice,
or attitude. They may also be used to plan future activities.
Reflection deliverables focus on answering the question “What did you, as an
engineering designer, obtain from this design experience?”
10% 15%
Assignments with a weight of “Formative” are submitted to elicit feedback from the Course Instructors and
possibly from peer teams. Assignments with a weight of “Varies” will have an exact percent weighting
assigned by each team in consultation with the Course Instructors.
Due Date Deliverable Type Weight Submitter
2012-09-22 Proposal Draft
Delivered electronically to the Course Instructors
Process Formative Team
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20119
Syllabus [4/7]
Due Date Deliverable Type Weight Submitter
2012-09-28@1200 Proposal
Delivered electronically to the Client and the
Course Instructors
Process 5% Team
2012-10-20 Preliminary Design Draft
Delivered electronically to the Course Instructors
Product +
Process
Formative Team
2012-10-26@1200 Preliminary Design
Delivered electronically to the Client and
the Course Instructors and physically
(as appropriate) to the Client.
Product +
Process
Varies Team
2012-11-19 Design Critique (group presentation) Product 10% Team
From 2012-12-6
to 2012-12-14
Walkthrough
Scheduled by appointment with the Course
Instructors and, schedules permitting, the
Client
Product Varies Team
2012-12-21@1200 Final Design
Delivered electronically to the Client and to the
Course Instructors, and physically to the Client.
Product +
Process
Varies Team
2012-12-21@1200 Record of Reflection
Delivered electronically to the Course Instructors
Reflection Varies Individual
Additional details will be released at a reasonable point in time prior to each deliverable’s due date.
Team Grades
When working in teams, students are expected to divide workload in an equitable fashion. The nature of the
division is up to the team members, and does not require that all members work the same hours or produce
identical volumes of work. Team members are expected to follow practices of good teamwork and to comport
themselves as professionals. Students are also expected to report any difficulties with regards to
teamwork to the Course Instructors as soon as possible during the term; failure to report such
difficulties may result in the instructional team being unable to address student concerns.
By default, members of a team receive an identical grade on team assignments. Based on solicited,
confidential feedback, the Course Instructors may adjust the grade distribution within a team.
“Double-counting”
Students who are enrolled in both ESC471 Engineering Science Capstone and PHY427 Advanced Physics
Laboratory may use the same experiment as the basis for, and may obtain academic credit in, both courses.
Students who wish to base their ESC471 project on an experiment in a different course that they are taking
concurrently must receive approval from the ESC471 Course Instructors. Students who do not receive
such approval will be assumed to have violated the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters.
Late Penalties
Due dates have been selected such that course workload is spread out over the term and that sufficient time
is available to provide formative feedback prior to the submission of summative assignments. Assignments
that are submitted late will be subject to a cumulative penalty, as outlined in the respective assignment
descriptions. Note that this practice deviates from the more common industry practice of not accepting late
deliverables.
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20119
Syllabus [5/7]
Support and Accommodation
Students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. Students who have a disability
or health consideration that may require accommodations are both encouraged and welcome to approach the
Course Instructors as soon as possible. Should accommodations be necessary, by University of
Toronto policy students are required to contact the Accessibility Services Office.
Policies
Students in Capstone Design are expected to comport themselves professionally and to exercise common
sense8. They are also expected to be familiar with, and act according to, the following University policies,
guidelines, and interpretations:
• Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm
• Code of Student Conduct
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/studentc.htm
• Academic Integrity (Student Rights & Responsibilities Series)
http://www.utoronto.ca/academicintegrity/Academic_integrity.pdf
• Petitions and Appeals
http://www.apsc.utoronto.ca/Calendars/2011%2D2012/Academic-Regulations.html#Note105
• University of Toronto Inventions Policy
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/invent.htm
• University of Toronto Policy on Official Correspondence with Students
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/studentemail.htm
Instructional Materials and Copyright
Students are prohibited from recording or otherwise reproducing any copyrighted materials associated with
ESC471 Capstone Design unless they obtain prior permission from the copyright holder. Unless otherwise
indicated, tangible instructional materials (e.g. assignments, slides, handouts, etc.) developed by the Course
Instructors are released under a Creative Commons license that permits the sharing of the materials, so
long as attribution is made, no financial remuneration is asked, and any derivative works are similarly
licensed. Tangible instructional materials developed by other parties are assumed to be copyright those
parties unless otherwise indicated.
Intangible instructional materials, in particular spoken or presented content, is assumed to be copyright
those providing the materials, including the Course Instructors.
Public Disclosure
Students agree that by taking this course all submitted deliverables may be used for teaching and learning
purposes, in this or subsequent courses, or to support research into improving engineering education. Should
such use take place, any content identifying the student will be removed. Students who are concerned
about the intellectual property ramifications of potential disclosure must notify the Course
Instructors prior to the end of the 20129 academic session.
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20119
Syllabus [6/7]
8 Students are encouraged to consult with the Course Instructors any time that they are uncertain as to
whether an activity or decision would be unprofessional or would indicate a lack of common sense.
Turnitin
Students agree that by taking this course all required papers may be subject to submission for textual
similarity review to Turnitin.com for the detection of plagiarism. All submitted papers will be included as
source documents in the Turnitin.com reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of
such papers. The terms that apply to the University's use of the Turnitin.com service are described on the
Turnitin.com web site. The intellectual property of all students submitting to Turnitin.com is protected by
the licensing agreement between the University of Toronto and iParadigms. This agreement further ensures
that student papers submitted to Turnitin.com will not be used for commercial purposes.
ESC471 – Engineering Science Capstone Design – 20119
Syllabus [7/7]