DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
MGT495H5S LEC0103
Entrepreneurial Finance and Private Equity
Course Outline - Winter 2024
Class Location & Time Mon, 05:00 PM - 07:00 PM DH 2070
Instructor Camille Hebert
Office Location
Office Hours on request
E-mail Address cam.hebert@utoronto.ca
Course Web Site https://q.utoronto.ca
Teaching Assistant Fiona Murphy-Trepanier
E-mail Address fiona.trepanier@mail.utoronto.ca
Teaching Assistant Nurzhan Mussabekov
E-mail Address nurzhan.mussabekov@mail.utoronto.ca
Course Description
The primary objective of the course is to improve students' ability to understand the concepts and institutions involved in
entrepreneurial finance and private equity. Private equity firms have demonstrated an ability to create value by acting as a financial
intermediary, between firms and ultimate investors. The course will provide students with skill sets so they can analyze and
understand entrepreneurial financing opportunities and private equity from multiple perspectives: the perspective of the founder
seeking and receiving private equity financing for their project; the perspective of the private equity fund (GP); and, the perspective
of the limited partners (LP) that provide finance for private equity funds.
Prerequisite:
MGT231H5 and MGT232H5
Exclusion: RSM439H1 (SSc)
Distribution Requirement: SSc
Course Objective
MGT495 examines the elements of entrepreneurial finance, focusing on technology-based start-up ventures and the early stages of
company development. The course addresses key questions that challenge all entrepreneurs: how much money can and should be
raised; when should it be raised and from whom; what is a reasonable company valuation; and how should funding, employment
contracts and exit decisions be structured. It aims to prepare students for these decisions, both as entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists. In addition, the course includes an in-depth analysis of the structure of the private equity industry.
The course covers all stages of the financing process, from startup to harvest and exit. Issues covered in this course will include
valuation of high-risk projects, negotiations and deal structuring, incentive design, term-sheet contracts, financial management in
rapidly growing firms, initial public offerings, mergers and acquisitions, inequalities and discrimination in the context of
entrepreneurial finance. Among capital suppliers, we consider the role and incentives of angel investors, venture capital firms, other
private equity firms, commercial banks, and investment banks.
Course Learning Outcomes
Help students gain a deeper understanding of finance and evaluation techniques
Provide a framework for making investment decisions about high-uncertainty projects
Provide students with institutional background, specialized vocabulary, and important facts about the VC industry
Expose students to several promising new companies
Introduce students to DEI issues in entrepreneurial finance
Improve communication skills
Teaching methods
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 1 of 11
Lectures about the key concepts
Business cases
Class discussions
A semester-long project that requires teamwork, creativity, and multiple rounds of presentations
Financing for Startups: Our course emphasizes the financing of early-stage startups, where traditional financial approaches are
often inadequate. We'll explore initial funding avenues-bootstrapping, angel investors, and venture capital-examining their fit for
different stages of startup growth. Students will learn to assess risk, value pre-revenue startups, and navigate early-stage investment
to lay the foundation for successful entrepreneurial ventures. Hence, in our exploration of entrepreneurial finance, we delve into the
intricate evaluation process that underpins successful entrepreneurial ventures. Recognizing that entrepreneurship is not a linear
journey but a multifaceted endeavor, this course dissects the stages and dimensions that shape its landscape.
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in Entrepreneurial Finance:
Entrepreneurial finance will also serve as an exemplary context to study Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) due to the inherent
complexities and multidimensional nature of the field. Entrepreneurs come from diverse backgrounds, bring diverse educational
experiences and human capital to their ventures. This diversity is a driving force behind innovation and economic growth. We will
explore the effects of financing constraints on underrepresented groups and the critical role that financial intermediaries play in
either perpetuating or alleviating these inequalities. By examining the geographic concentration of resources, we will reveal the
disparities in opportunity based on location and demography. The course also tackles the challenges posed by information
asymmetry, particularly how biases and stereotypes can influence investor decisions. An objective of this course is to understand
these dimensions to think of more equitable financial practices and a more inclusive entrepreneurial ecosystem.
Textbooks and Other Materials
Students are responsible for checking Quercus regularly for announcements, assignments, and supplementary material. I consider
posting information on Quercus to be sufficient notice for you to be held responsible for it.
Required readings and electronic course materials
I will post the lecture notes before each class. However, I will not post slides associated with the cases. This is because there are
usually no absolute right answers when discussing a case. The best cases are deliberately written to be ambiguous. Cases are not
algebraic proofs that build on mathematical axioms. They are not exercises in classic mechanical Physics either. While there are no
right answers, there are good arguments and bad arguments.
All materials generated for the course, including slides, handouts, review materials, and assignments, or any other materials
prepared by you or the professor for this course, are intended for use by current students in this class only unless you have the
permission of your instructor. You are not permitted to use materials related to the class that were generated by the professor or
students in previous versions of this course.
Required Case Package from HBS publishing
All the required and recommended readings subject to copyright can be purchased in the form of a course pack from Harvard
Business Publishing after you register as a student. I will post the readings that are not subject to copyright on Quercus.
You can download the required readings in the form of a course pack from this link: https://hbsp.harvard.edu/import/1119890
The cost of the case package is about 50 Canadian dollars. The case pack replaces a mandatory textbook.
The use of these materials complies with all University of Toronto policies, which govern fees for course materials.
Books and Textbooks to go beyond:
Metrick, A., & Yasuda, A. (2021). Venture capital and the finance of innovation. John Wiley & Sons.
Mallaby, S. (2022). The Power Law: Venture Capital and the Making of the New Future. Penguin.
Feld, B., & Mendelson, J. (2019). Venture deals: Be smarter than your lawyer and venture capitalist. John Wiley & Sons.
I made these books optional because we will use small portions of each textbook throughout the course. You can purchase these
books online or at the university bookstore.
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 2 of 11
Type Description Due Date Weight
Class Participation Class participation (on-going) On-going 15%
Assignment Case write-ups (5 out of 6) On-going 15%
Quiz Quizzes (in class 4 out of 6) On-going 10%
Presentations Business Plan Presentation 2024-02-12 20%
Presentations Term Sheet Presentation 2024-03-25 20%
Final Exam Final exam (during exam period) TBA 20%
Total 100%
Assessment and Grading Policies
Note that the Course Schedule, Assessment and Grading Policies detailed in this course outline are contingent on class delivery
staying unchanged. The course outline may change at the instructors' discretion under unforeseeable circumstances, e.g. lockdown
due to COVID. For example, if we are required to offer courses via remote delivery during the semester, the instructor will make
the necessary adjustments, including, but not limited to, the nature and timing of assignments and tests, reweighting of course
assessments, and other course content. These changes will be communicated via Quercus.
Requirements and Criteria
The course is based on two crucial building blocks: the cases and the project. Entrepreneurship often involves working in teams,
and communication skills are particularly important in this industry and an important component of your grade.
Class participation (15%)
Your participation will be based on the quality of your comments (e.g., demonstrating understanding and analysis of the topic,
generating ideas, promoting further discussion), the frequency of comments, and your professionalism. I expect you to attend every
class, be on time, and be prepared to participate. You must bring a name tent to every class, so I can call on you using the name you
prefer. During the first class, you will choose a seat that you will keep for the rest of the semester, so class participation can be
appropriately recorded and rewarded. This means that you must attend classes in the section you registered for.
Case write-ups (15%)
For most class meetings, you will prepare one case study. You will be responsible for preparing the cases in teams before class.
Each team will submit a minimum of five cases out of the six. Case 2 (part 2 only) and case 3 are mandatory cases. Each team will
have to submit a write-up for these two cases. The four other cases are at your discretion. The final case write-up grade will be the
average of the five highest case write-ups. The case deliverable due date is on Sundays, the day before class, at 23:59 PM
(submissions will automatically lose 1% per minute following the deadline). One write-up report per team must be uploaded to
Quercus (except for the first case). Make sure all team members' names appear on the first page of the case write-up.
To guide the case preparation, I will assign study questions, which will be posted on Quercus. Teams are responsible for producing
a two-page maximum write-up for each case. The two-page limit is for text only. You may attach numerical calculations, excel
spreadsheets or other appendices as you wish. Write the write-up as if you were writing a recommendation to the major decisionmaker
in the case. You should start by briefly stating your recommendation and then articulate how and why you reached that
conclusion. The study questions should help you think through the case. You should aim for clarity, strong organization, concision,
professionalism, and correct grammar. Sources should always be correctly attributed.
The use of AI-assisting software such as Chat GPT is not prohibited. However, for each case submission, you must indicate
whether you have used these tools. In addition, you will briefly explain how you used these tools, if any. Examples of the use of
Chat GPT include (and are not restricted to) enhancing writing skills, getting ideas for assignments, brainstorming, and researching
specific concepts. Be as specific as you can. Note that I ran all case questions in Chat GPT. Hence, case write-ups that will end up
being too close to what I got from Chat GPT will be penalized. In addition, each case submission will be checked for plagiarism
using the Quercus-embedded plagiarism tool.
In-class quizzes (10%)
Students will take six in-class quizzes during the semester. Students will not be permitted to take quizzes outside of class. Quizzes
are individual assignments. The duration of each quiz will be 5 to 10 minutes, depending on the quiz. Quizzes will be about the
case of the day. To be able to complete the quiz, you need to read the case. Questions are expected to be specific to the case. The
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 3 of 11
final quiz grade will be the average of the four highest quiz grades.
Team project (40% = 20% + 20%)
The project is a crucial component of the class that will follow us throughout the semester. The project is developed at the team
level, and the teams preparing the case write-ups weekly are the same.
The project allows you to put into practice what we learn in class. You will take the side of both the entrepreneur who seeks
financing (part 1) and the investor who seeks opportunities (part 2). For those of you who are interested in pursuing your own
entrepreneurial ideas, the project will help you to organize your initial thoughts in the systematic framework before further
launching to the market. For those who want to learn more about entrepreneurial finance and private equity, the project will be a
great learning opportunity to test the extent to which you can put the content of the course into practice.
Each team member will be evaluated for the business plan (part 1) and for the term sheet proposal (part 2). The final grade will
reflect the work of the whole team , and hence, the grade will be the same for all members of the team. Both in part 1 and part 2,
the deliverable will consist of (i) PowerPoint slides (submitted on Quercus) and (ii) a 5 to 10-minute presentation during class in
front of the jury and the other students. During presentations in class, all members of the team are expected to stand in front of the
class and speak for an approximately equal time. More information will be communicated in class.
Final exam (25%)
The final exam will be an individual final exam. The final exam will be a open-book exam during the exam period.
Project Short Description
A crucial component of the class, which will follow us throughout the semester, is the project. The project is developed at the team
level, and the teams that prepare the case write-ups each week are the same. Each team should include three students.
The project allows you to put into practice what we learned in class. You will take the side of both the entrepreneur who seeks
financing and the investor who seeks opportunities. For those of you interested in pursuing your own entrepreneurial ideas, the
project will help organize your initial thoughts in the systematic framework you will use when interfacing with investors. For those
who want to learn more about entrepreneurial finance and private equity, the project will be a great learning opportunity to test the
extent to which you can put the content of the course into practice.
The timeline of the project is as follows:
Step 1: On Tuesday, January 23rd (after class 3), you will submit a brief description of two ideas for a high-growth-oriented
startup. We will read the proposals, and we will come back to you with suggestions for the idea that seems more promising and for
which it would be easier to convince investors. Importantly, the teams need not necessarily follow the idea we select. Choosing to
pursue the idea I selected or the other one will have no implications in terms of your grade. Being an entrepreneur means you
should pursue the idea you find more convincing, which does not need to be the one an external advisor recommends.
Step 2: On Monday, February 12th (class 6), teams will pitch and present their business plan to the class. During the presentation,
each team member must talk for an equal amount of time. I will give more information about the structure of the business plan
during class 3. Of course, we will be very happy to discuss the aspects of the business plans with which the teams might be
uncertain before the deadline. Slides for the presentation will be uploaded to Quercus on Sunday, February 11th.
Once the business plans are ready, we will all change roles and become venture capitalists who want to invest in one of the startup's
businesses presented during Step.
Step 3: On Monday, March 25th (class 11), teams will present their term sheet assessment and funding proposal for one of the
business plans presented in Step 2. This means that teams cannot reject all projects, and they cannot decide to fund all. The teams
cannot fund the business plan they presented in step 2. During the presentation, each team member must talk for an equal amount
of time. Note that whether your business plan is funded or not will not be part of the grading of the project. However, it might be
investor teams pass on your business plan because it is inaccurate or presents inconsistencies, which will affect the grading. Slides
for the presentation will be uploaded to Quercus on Sunday, March 24th.
Step 4: For the projects that received funding from the most teams of investors, I will ask the business plan teams to prepare a few
presentation slides for Monday, April 1st (last session). The rest of the class, including those who did not review the project as
investors, will act as potential investors and will ask questions and raise doubts that the presenting team is expected to address as if
in a real investor meeting.
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 4 of 11
The project beyond MGT495: I partnered with ICUBE, the UTM startup accelerator, to set up this project. The most promising
projects or students interested in pursuing an entrepreneurial project will have the opportunity to continue with ICUBE. ICUBE
offers dedicated resources, workshops and mentorship to early-stage startups.
Conduct of Class
This course is designed to be a time-consuming and challenging course. You will have to prepare one case per week and handle a
two-page write-up for each case. In addition, you will work on a team project throughout the semester. Coming to class unprepared
is a waste of your time because you will not be able to internalize the contents of the class discussion if you do not understand all
the aspects of a case.
Lectures
This course places a strong emphasis on presentation and discussion skills. Students will need to explain their positions to each
other and argue for the implementation of their recommendations. They should expect to participate actively, drawing on
information from the cases. Recall that once on the job, your presentation and discussion skills will be as important, if not more
important, than the content you present. Because of the nature of this course (and its grading criteria, see below), it is extremely
important that you attend every class, arrive on time, and be prepared to participate. If you cannot make a class, we expect that you
send me a note in advance unless your absence is due to unforeseen circumstances.
Team formation rules
Teams must be formed by three students who are registered in the same section. Students will keep the same team during the whole
semester. Teams will be defined in the first week of class and must include only students who registered in the same section. If
a student is not part of a team or if a student joins after the first week of class, I will assign them to an existing team, or I will form
a new team. If a student's team member(s) drop the course by the official deadline, I will reassign the student to a team of my
choice.
Laptop Policy: It is expected that students will use technology responsibly, with consideration for their fellow students and
other members of the University community. Laptops are not to be used during class for email, instant messaging, web browsing, or
any other activity that is disruptive to other students, the instructor, or the classroom environment. Violation of the laptop policy
may lead to a prohibition on laptop use for all students to ensure a productive classroom environment for everyone.
Note that a laptop will be needed to take the in-class quizzes. If a student cannot bring a laptop to class, I will provide quizzes on
paper.
Course Resources: Students must check Quercus regularly for course-related material, including recommended problems, news
stories, etc. Students are responsible for all content posted on the course website. Important announcements may be posted on the
course website periodically, so students are advised to check there frequently for updates.
Office Hours:
I will hold open office hours on request or otherwise announced on Quercus.
Email policy:
You can also contact me by email. Please include the course code in the subject line. You can expect a response within 48 weekday
hours.
Attendance Policy:
Attendance will be recorded on quiz days and presentation days, as students are required to take the quiz in class and all speak
during group presentations. Also, note that attendance impacts your participation. Students who do not attend classes cannot
participate.
Recorded Lectures:
Lectures will not be recorded. Students are expected to catch up on the missed lectures with the material posted on Quercus.
Procedures and Rules
Special Consideration Request for Academic Accommodation Request - Missed Tests & Quizzes (term work only, no final
exams):
To be considered for academic accommodation for missed tests and quizzes (ONLY), please follow the appropriate next steps
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 5 of 11
depending on your circumstance (i.e. illness related or non-illness related). Do NOT submit a petition for final exams. Final exam
deferrals must be submitted through the Registrar's Office. Extension of time requests should follow the same process.
Special Consideration Request Application: https://uoft.service-now.com/utm_scr
Illness or Non-illness Related Next Steps
1. Inform your professor in writing (e-mail is acceptable) no later than 24 hours after the test or quiz date of any
circumstances that prevent you from writing a test or quiz. Failure to do so will result in your special consideration request
petition being denied.
2. Submit an online Special Consideration Request as soon as possible, but no later than 72 hours after the test or quiz
date. Failure to do so will result in your request being denied. Special Consideration Request Application:
https://uoft.service-now.com/utm_scr
3. Provide your supporting documentation on the Special Consideration Request Application by attaching screenshots
or relevant documents within one week of the missed test/quiz. Supporting documentation may include a screenshot of
the Absence Declaration tool on ACORN. Please ensure the dates identified in your absence declaration include the actual
test or quiz date, if applicable. Please refer the course outline for term work exclusions from use of Absence
Declaration. The Department requires supporting documentation (such as Verification of Illness form) if your course
outline excludes test/quiz from the one-time ACORN declaration. Illness related documentation include the Verification
of Illness form which must be in English and completed by a practitioner registered and licensed in the Province of
Ontario with original signature and business stamp. Non illness related documentation will vary but a death in the family
requires submission of a death certificate. Requests without supporting documentation will be denied.
IMPORTANT
Failure to follow this process will result in your Special Consideration Request being denied.
If your form is not completed correctly with the necessary details to assess your Special Consideration Request, your
request may be denied.
In the case of an illness, you need to follow the specific Missed Tests requirements for your course (see Missed Tests
section below).
You may receive a follow up email or response on the Special Consideration Request Application from the UTMM
petitions committee. If so, you MUST respond within 24 hours.
If there is concern about your Special Consideration Request, your request may be refused and/or you may be asked to meet
with an Associate Chair or Program Director.
If you have multiple Special Consideration Requests your request may be refused.
If you do not complete the make-up work as and when required, you will receive a grade of zero for the original missed
test; further special consideration is not permitted.
Holidays and pre-purchased plane tickets, family plans (unless critical, such as death of an immediate family member), your
friend's wedding, lack of preparation, or too many other tests are not acceptable excuses for missing a quiz, a test, or an item of
course work.
The written explanation and documentation that you submit represents an appeal from you, which requests the opportunity to
account for that portion of your grade in an alternate manner than the normal one that is described in this course outline. If an
appeal is not received by the deadline specified above, or if the appeal is deemed unacceptable, you will receive a grade of zero.
Missed Test(s):
Missed in class-quiz
The final quiz grade is the average of four best quizzes (out of six), which means that if you miss two quizzes or less, your final
grade won't be impacted, and documentation will not be required. If you miss more than two quizzes (for illness or non-illness
reasons), you are required to provide documentation with your online Petition for Academic Accommodation, as per point 3 above.
Students who miss more than two quizzes will be required to take a make-up assignment at the instructor's discretion.
Missed presentation day (February 12, 2024 or March 25, 2024)
All team members are expected to be present on presentation days (and speak during their team's presentation). If you cannot make
a presentation day, I expect you will send me a note in advance unless your absence is due to unforeseen circumstances. Note that
your absence may impact your team's performance, hence your grade.
Late Assignment(s):
All assignments are due on the date and at the time specified in Quercus. Students will lose 1% for every minute they are late.
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 6 of 11
Students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit an assignment by its deadline must obtain prior approval from
the instructor for an extension. Supporting documentation will be required as per the policy on missed tests and assignments
Final Exams:
Students who cannot complete their final examination due to illness or other serious causes must file an online petition within 72
hours of the missed examination. Late petitions will NOT be considered. Upon approval of a deferred exam request, a nonrefundable
fee is required for each examination approved. See the Office of the Registrar Administrative Fees for Services page for
more information.
Academic Misconduct:
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the
University of Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats
cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and
the process for addressing academic offences. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
Making up sources or facts.
Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
On tests and exams:
1. Using or possessing unauthorized aids.
2. Looking at someone else's answers during an exam or test.
3. Misrepresenting your identity.
In academic work:
1. Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
2. Falsifying or altering any documentation required, including (but not limited to) doctor's notes.
Students should note that copying, plagiarizing, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student caught
engaging in such activities will be subject to academic discipline ranging from a mark of zero on the assignment, test or
examination to dismissal from the university as outlined in the academic handbook. Any student abetting or otherwise assisting in
such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties.
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University's plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual
similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in
the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the
University’s use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation web site (https://uoft.me/pdt-faq).
Standard of Conduct in this Course:
Since this course is part of a degree designed to give you a broad understanding of the world of business, we aim to run the course
in a way which will be consistent with the world of business - where many of you will spend your working lives. We strive to
provide accurate information, quality materials and good service, consistent with our obligations to maintain the high academic
standards of the Department of Management at the University of Toronto Mississauga.
In return we expect that you will conduct yourself in a way that prepares you for the world of work.
We start on time, so please do not arrive late and disrupt others.
Leaving class early is also disruptive to your colleagues and will not be permitted unless you have made prior arrangements
with the instructor.
Turn off your cell phone.
Keep up to date. Make sure that you know the class schedule. Check on the course web page for updates and posted
materials.
During the class, respect the learning opportunities of others. Don't distract others by chatting to your neighbour. Our
expectation is that you will not only contribute in class to your own learning, but also that of others.
Remote assessments:
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 7 of 11
1. Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments.
2. Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment.
3. Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
4. Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual "course groups."
5. Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters . If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources .
Copyright Notice:
Please be advised that the intellectual property rights in the material referred to on this syllabus and posted on the course site may
belong to the course instructor or other persons. You are not authorized to reproduce or distribute such material, in any form or
medium, without the prior consent of the intellectual property owner. For example, uploading course assignments or solutions to
Coursehero, Easy Edu, and other tutoring sites and services is strictly prohibited. Violation of intellectual property rights may be a
violation of the law and University of Toronto policies and may entail significant repercussions for the person found to have
engaged in such act. If you have any questions regarding your right to use the material in a manner other than as set forth in the
syllabus, please speak to your instructor.
Additional Information:
U of T statement on commitment to equity, human rights, and respect for diversity
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning
environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can
express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or
harassment against any persons or communities.
UTM statement on academic integrity
UTM wishes to remind students that they are expected to adhere to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters regardless of
the course delivery method. UTM expects that students will maintain the same academic honesty and integrity both in a
classroom setting and online. Potential academic offences related to digital contexts include, but are not limited to:
Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments.
Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment.
Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual "course groups."
Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters . If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources.
RGASC
The Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre (RGASC) is located in Room 3251 on the third floor of the Maanjiwe
nendamowinan Building. The RGASC offers individual consultations, workshops (many CCR-accredited), and a wide range of
programs to help students identify and develop the academic skills they need for success in their studies. In Winter 2022, their
programming will include both in-person and online options. Visit the RGASC website to explore their online resources, book
an in-person or online appointment, or learn about other programming such as Writing Retreats, the Program for Accessing
Research Training (PART), Mathematics and Numeracy Support, and dedicated resources for English Language Learners.
UTM Library's
UTM Library - The University of Toronto Library provides access to a vast collection of online and print resources to faculty,
staff, and students and is the largest academic library in Canada. The UTM Library offers Reference and Research Help inperson
and also virtually, through chat, Zoom, and individual research consultations, to help students navigate library
databases, find relevant articles for their research, and cite correctly. The Library Workshops and Events help students learn
about the search techniques and specialized software, needed to be successful in their academic journey. For more information,
visit http://library.utm.utoronto.ca.
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 8 of 11
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 9 of 11
Date Topic
2024-01-08 Session 1 Introduction and Class Organization
Who becomes entrepreneurs? How to finance start-ups? What is PE/VC/Entrepreneurial finance?
Project: Submit your team by Friday, Jan 12 at 23.59pm
2024-01-15 Session 2 The VC industry
Facts and trends about the VC industry: Who are the top players? GPS, LPs, what do they do?
Case 1: Carmichael Roberts - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, Jan 14 at 23.59pm
Quiz 1 in class: Carmichael Roberts
2024-01-22 Session 3 Writing a business plan
Case 2 - part 1: Lady M - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, Jan 21 at 23.59pm
Project: Submit two business ideas - deadline: Tuesday, Jan 23 at 23.59pm
Quiz 2in class: Lady M
2024-01-29 Session 4 Valuing Startups: DCF
Qualitative valuation: DCF, FCF, Discount rates, Comparable and multiples
Case 2 - part 2: Lady M (mandatory case) - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, Jan 28 at
23.59pm
2024-02-05 Session 5 Valuing Startups: VC method
VC valuation method
Case 3: ZipCar (mandatory case) - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, Feb 4 at 23.59pm
Quiz 3 in class: ZipCar
2024-02-12 Session 6 Presentation of the Business Plans
Guest speaker 2 - The entrepreneur
Project: business plan presentations in class
deadline to submit the slides to Quercus: Sunday, Feb 11 at 23.59pm
2024-02-19 Reading week
2024-02-26 Session 7 VC Term Sheets and Deal Structure
Term sheets, VC financing instruments (Common equity vs Preferred stocks, Payoff structures
Case 4: Surya - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, Feb 25 at 23.59pm
Quiz 4 in class: Surya
Course Schedule
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 10 of 11
2024-03-04 Session 8 Late-stage Ventures Valuation
Multiple rounds, Private Equity Investments, Growth equity
Guest speaker 2 - The investor
Project: Submit the name of the startup idea you choose to invest in - deadline: Sunday, March 3 at 23.59pm
2024-03-11 Session 9 Evaluating Exit Options
IPO Process and Valuation, M&As, Direct listings, Secondary transactions
Case 5: RightNow - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, March 10 at 23.59pm
Quiz 5 in class: RightNow
2024-03-18 Session 10 Gender and Racial Diversity in Entrepreneurial Finance
Facts and Trends, Theories of Discrimination
Case 6: Bulk Whiz - deadline to submit the case write-up to Quercus: Sunday, March 17 at 23.59pm
Quiz 6 in class: BulkWhiz
2024-03-25 Session 11 Project: Term sheets presentations
Project: term sheet presentations in class
deadline to submit the slides to Quercus: Sunday, March 24 at 23.59pm
2024-04-08 Session 12 Class wrap-up
Project: the most successful teams present their business plan
TBA Final Examination
Last Date to drop course from Academic Record and GPA is March 11, 2024.
The Course Schedule above is subject to change due to the constantly evolving nature of COVID public health measures. Please
check Quercus and emails regularly for any changes to the proposed schedule.
MGT495H5S - Hebert, Camille 2024-01-05 16:25:58 Page 11 of 11