Type Description Due Date Weight
Assignment Annotated Bibliography 2024-01-30 15%
Term Test Term Test 2024-02-13 25%
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
SOC322H5S LEC0101
Criminal Justice and Inequality
Course Outline - Winter 2024
Class Location & Time Tue, 01:00 PM - 03:00 PM MN 3190
Instructor Akwasi Owusu-Bempah
Office Location NE6258
Office Hours Tuesday 11am - 12pm
E-mail Address a.o.bempah@utoronto.ca
Course Web Site https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/334485
Teaching Assistant Asefi Ferdouse
Office Hours TBA
E-mail Address ferdouse.asefi@mail.utoronto.ca
Course Description
This course examines the intersections between social inequality and the criminal justice system in Canada and internationally. The
course will explore the impact of practices and policies on race, class, gender and other forms of social inequality. [24L]
Prerequisite: (SOC109H5 or SOC209H5) and (SOC205H5 or SOC231H5) and SOC221H5 and SOC222H5 (SSc)
Distribution Requirement: SSc
It is your responsibility to ensure that the prerequisites for this course have been met. Students without the prerequisites can be
removed at any time. No waivers will be granted.
Detailed Course Description
This course examines the intersections between social inequality and the criminal justice system in Canada and internationally. The
course will explore the impact of practices and policies on race, class, gender and other forms of social inequality.
Learning Outcomes
1. Gain an understanding of how social inequalities intersect to influence citizens' perceptions of and experiences with the
criminal justice system.
2. To develop an understanding of how the criminal justice system produces social inequalities.
3. Assess and analyze the complex structures and challenges facing law enforcement, the judiciary and corrections in dealing
with diverse populations.
4. Evaluate, summarize and apply scholarly information when assessing and analyzing the legal and criminal justice systems.
5. Assess and utilize scholarly research to support written arguments.
6. Produce scholarly arguments in the form of an analysis paper.
Textbooks and Other Materials
Perry, Barbara, J (Ed.). (2016) Diversity, Crime and Justice in Canada (Second Edition). Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University
Press.
Additional readings available through the course website.
Every attempt will be made to follow this list, but it is subject to change at the discretion of the instructor.
Evaluation Components
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 1 of 7
Assignment Essay 2024-03-19 35%
Term Test Term Test 2024-04-02 25%
Total 100%
You should receive at least one significant mark (15%) before the last day you can drop a course without academic penalty.
Please note that Grades in Quercus gives early access to preliminary grades; it does not represent your official final marks. For final
grades logon to ACORN.
Grading
Annotated Bibliograpy (Jan 30, 2024)
Purpose: Locating and reading relevant sources is the first step to writing an analytical paper, and this assignment will serve as a
prelude to your writing. You must locate and annotate six (6) sources relevant to your essay topic. These sources must be the most
pertinent research. The topic is Inequality and Criminal Justice. It is not sufficient to annotate 6 sources - they must be the most
relevant ones for your topic. A list of essay topics is included below. By locating, reading, and annotating your sources you will
position yourself to construct a solid analytical argument for your essay. You are also required to develop a brief outline or
argument for your essay after completing your annotations.
Topic: This topic examines the intersection between inequality and criminal justice. Inequality can be inequality of class, race,
gender, religion, sexual orientation, and so on. Criminal justice refers to the intersection of one of these topics with some elements
of the criminal justice system, such as police, courts, border security, sentencing, corrections, parole, and so on. You should focus
on ONE topic (for example, race and sentencing).
Requirements:
1. Sources should be scholarly, peer-reviewed journals or book chapters (research reports from government sources are also
acceptable). No other source (i.e. media, webpages, etc.) will be accepted for this assignment.
2. Your goal is to annotate the relevant information and explain how the source contributes to your overall paper.
Sources can be directly related to your essay topic.
Test One (Feb 13, 2024)
The test will include multiple choice and short answer questions. No aids. One hour fifty minutes in duration. The test will cover
material from
the beginning of term up until the test date.
Essay (March 19, 2024)
Purpose: You must now complete the final phase of the writing process by integrating your annotated bibliography research and
any feedback received into a final essay. The central aim is to synthesize and integrate your research into a coherent and empirically
supported argument.
Topic: This topic examines the intersection between inequality and criminal justice. Inequality can be inequality of class, race,
gender, religion, sexual orientation, and so on. Criminal justice refers to the intersection of one of these topics with some elements
of the criminal justice system, such as police, courts, border security, sentencing, corrections, parole, and so on. You should focus
on ONE topic (for example, race and sentencing, gender and policing). The aim is for you to choose an axis of inequality and
discuss how it interacts with a component of the criminal justice system. You are to make a clear argument in the form of a thesis
statement and then support your argument with the material located through your research (library and scholarly database
searches). More information will be provided in lecture.
Structure: You are free to structure the paper in any way that helps you to convey your argument more effectively. Headings and
sub-headings may be used if appropriate.
Document Parameters: The paper must be 8-pages (12 font, double spaced, 1 inch margins), excluding cover page and
references. Failure to adhere to these parameters will result in penalty. Don't get creative with the font, margins, or spacing.
Term Test (April 2, 2024)
Multiple choice and short answer. The test will be one hour fifty minutes. It will cover the material taught thoughout in the second
part ofthe cours (since the first test). No aids.
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 2 of 7
Class/Seminar Format
Classes will include a combination of lecture, small group discussion and group activities. Students will be expected to engage
with the course material, their peers and the instructor in a positive manner. Relevant material from traditional and social media
will be included as necessary to compliment and contextualize course readings.
Procedures and Rules
Missed Academic Obligations
Students who miss an academic obligation during the term (i.e., quiz, test, assignment) may use the ACORN absence declaration
tool (AD) to record an absence in one or more courses. This option may be used once per term for a single absence period of
up to seven consecutive days in one or more courses. The declaration period must include the day of declaration and may
include past and/or future dates, for a total of up to seven calendar days. Use of the ACORN AD does not require documentation. It
remains the student's responsibility to initiate the process of seeking academic consideration – such as a make-up test,
assignment extension – by following the instructions listed below, under "Seeking Academic Consideration for a Missed Academic
Obligation."
Before a student declares an absence on ACORN for a test or quiz, they should review the syllabus closely as the instructor may
have exempted that test or quiz from the ACORN AD. If there is an instructor exemption for that test or quiz, you are required to
submit documentation when seeking academic consideration for the test or quiz and you should not use ACORN to declare the
absence for that test or quiz.
If a student misses an academic obligation but has already used the ACORN AD during that term, they will be required to submit
documentation when seeking academic consideration. It is the student's responsibility to initiate the process of seeking academic
consideration – such as a make-up test, assignment extension – by following the instructions listed below, under "Seeking
Academic Consideration for a Missed Academic Obligation."
If you are facing circumstances that make securing documentation difficult, please contact your instructor and/or our program
counsellor directly to discuss.
Reasons for temporary absences include illness, injury, and other unplanned circumstances beyond a student's control (such as
court subpoena, funeral, car accident). Reasons such as holidays, pre-purchased plane tickets, family plans, lack of test/assignment
preparation, conflicting deadlines, late course registration, technology failure, and traffic- or weather-related incidents are not
considered to be beyond a student's control. If you are a student seeking accommodation due to religious observance, you should
follow the steps below under "Seeking Academic Consideration for a Missed Obligation" at least three weeks in advance; do not
use the ACORN AD for religious accommodation.
Process for Seeking Academic Consideration for a Missed Academic Obligation
If you missed a test or an assignment due date, or are registered with Accessibility Services and anticipate needing an extension on
an assignment, please click here.
Students who miss an academic obligation during the term (i.e., quiz, test, assignment) are responsible for initiating the process of
seeking academic consideration within 3 days of the assessment, including weekends and holidays. These special consideration
requests are made to the department and not to instructors, and for reasons beyond the student's control. Students who do not seek
academic consideration will receive a zero on the assessment in question.
If you are feeling ill, do not start your test/quiz. Instead, seek medical attention immediately. Students cannot seek academic
consideration for a test or quiz they have already begun.
Instructors may accept term work until the last day of the term. Instructors may also, at their discretion, grant extensions for term
work until the end of the examination period, with the approval of the chair of the department. Petitions are required for extensions
beyond end of term or for deferred examinations. Visit the Office of the Registrar website to learn more about petitions.
Late Assignments
Late assignments must be submitted to the instructor via Quercus.
In order not to be considered late, assignments must be submitted by the due date listed on the syllabus in hard copy at the
beginning via Quercus ]. You are expected to keep a back-up, hard copy of your assignment in case it is lost.
Late assignments for reasons that are within your control will be penalized 2% marks per day. The penalty will run from the
day the assignment was due until the day it is submitted to the instructor via Quercus.
The penalty period includes weekends and holidays.
Assignments that are more than seven (7) days late will not be accepted.
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 3 of 7
Late assignments must be submitted in accordance with the instructions above; other faculty and staff within the department cannot
and will not accept late assignments
Re-marking Pieces of Term Work
A student who believes that their written term work has a substantive error in grading may ask the person who marked the work for
re-evaluation. Students have up to one month from the date of return of an item of term work to inquire about the mark and file an
appeal. For example, should the marked term work be made available on March 3rd, the student has until April 3rd to seek remarking.
Requests for re-marking should include an explanation written by the student detailing why they believe the work was
incorrectly/unfairly assessed, referring only to their work, assignment/test guidelines, rubrics, etc as needed. Decisions will be
provided to students in a timely fashion.
As per the university's policy, only term work worth at least 20% of the course mark may be appealed beyond the instructor. To
escalate an appeal beyond the instructor, the student must submit the re-eavluation request, original piece of work, and all
correspondence on the matter of re-evaluation to the associate chair.
For more on the university's re-marking policy, please click here.
This process applies only to term work; appeals for re-reads of final examinations are handled directly by the Office of the
Registrar.
Electronic Communication and Electronic Learning Technology
Email communication is rapid, convenient, and efficient—and you are encouraged to use it to enhance your learning and
experience in the course. With that said, it is essential that you follow a few rules. Note: Emails that do not follow these
guidelines will not receive a response.
Assignments must be submitted to the instructor via Quercus.
Assignments will not be accepted via email. See above for how to submit them.
All course communication should be conducted through Quercus or your U of T email account.
All emails must include the course code (e.g., SOC322) in the subject line.
All emails should be signed with the student's full name and student number.
Emails from students will generally be answered within 48 hours or 2 working days of receipt.
Treat emails as you would any other professional communication. Proofread. Use appropriate language.
Emails that ask questions that are answered in the course syllabus or website (e.g., "how much is assignment X worth") will
not receive a response.
All general questions about the course that are NOT addressed on the syllabus and course website should be posted to the
'general inquiries' section of the Quercus Discussions.
Classroom Etiquette
Students are expected to arrive to class on time.
Videotaping and recording lectures is strictly forbidden without written permission from the instructor.
Videotaping and recording lectures is strictly forbidden without written permission. Please email your instructor to discuss.
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the
University of Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats
cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and
the process for addressing academic offences.
Copying, plagiarizing, falsifying medical certificates, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student
caught engaging in such activities will be referred to the Dean’s office for adjudication and punishment. Any student abetting or
otherwise assisting in such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources. By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the university's rules regarding academic
conduct, as outlined in the Calendar. You are expected to be familiar with the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and Code of
Student Conduct.
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 4 of 7
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the
University of Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student's individual academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats
cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto's Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and
the process for addressing academic offences.
Copying, plagiarizing, falsifying medical certificates, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student
caught engaging in such activities will be referred to the Dean's office for adjudication and punishment. Any student abetting or
otherwise assisting in such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources. By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the university's rules regarding academic
conduct, as outlined in the Calendar. You are expected to be familiar with the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and Code of
Student Conduct.
Student Services and Resources
The university offers a variety of student support services and resources, which can be found at
http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/current-students. This includes supports for your academics, health, and wellness, and other student
services.
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 5 of 7
Date Topic
2024-01-09 Topic: Introduction and Overview
Readings: Syllabus
2024-01-16 Topic: Considering Diversity and Framing Difference
Readings: Perry Chapters 1 and 2
2024-01-23 Topic: The Creation of Difference
Readings: Perry Chapters 3 and 4
2024-01-30 Topic: Intersectionality and the Criminal Justice System
Readings: Perry Chapter 11; Potter (2013) Intersectional Criminology
***Annotated Bibliography Due***
2024-02-06 Topic: Colonialism and Criminal Justice: Past and Present
Readings: Perry Chapter 5; Staples (1975) White Racism, Black Crime, and American Justice: An Application
of
the Colonial Model to Explain Crime and Race
2024-02-13 Test One
2024-02-20 Reading Week
2024-02-27 Topic: Immigration, Religion and Criminal Justice
Readings: Perry Chapters 6 and 10
2024-03-05 Topic: Inequality and Policing
Readings: Owusu-Bempah (2017) Race and Policing in Historical Context; Weitzer (2014) Police Race
Relations; Brunson and Gau (2014) Race, Place, and Policing in the Inner-City
2024-03-12 Topic: Inequality and the Courts
Readings: Mauer (2004) Race class and the development of criminal justice policy; Wortley and Owusu-
Bempah (2009)
Unequal Before the Law; Mirza, F (2001) Mandatory Minimum Prison Sentencing and Systemic Racism
Course Schedule
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 6 of 7
2024-03-19 Topic: Corrections and Re-entry
Readings: Wakefield & Uggen (2010) Incarceration and stratification.pdf; Wildman and Muller (2012) Mass
Imprisonment and Inequality in Health and Family Life
2024-03-26 Topic: Looking to the Future
Readings: Perry Chapters 18 and 19
Test Review
2024-04-02 Test Two
Last Date to drop course from Academic Record and GPA is March 11, 2024.
Every attempt will be made to follow this schedule, but it is subject to change at the discretion of the instructor.
SOC322H5S - Owusu-Bempah, Akwasi 2023-12-13 15:43:38 Page 7 of 7