1
UBC . PSYC-305A Personality Psychology (Section 921) Summer Term 1 (May – June 2018) Tues/Thurs 11:00 am – 1:50 pm in CIRS 1250
YOUR INSTRUCTOR
David King, PhD Email: dbking11@psych.ubc.ca
Please include full course code (PSYC-305A-921) in subject line of all emails.
Office: Room 4035, Audain Art Centre, 6398 University Blvd
Office Hours: Tuesdays 2:00 – 2:45 pm (arrive by) or by appointment
Website: www.davidbking.net
YOUR TEACHING ASSISTANTS
Ali Tracy alison.tracy@psych.ubc.ca Giulia Capuzzo gcapuzzo@psych.ubc.ca Office: Douglas Kenny Room 1604 Office: Café Ami in CBH / Douglas Kenny 3506
Office Hours: Thursdays 9:45 – 10:45 am Office Hours: Tuesdays 10:00 – 10:45 am in CBH
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course is designed to provide a broad introduction to the theory and research in the scientific study of personality psychology. We will cover six domains of personality functioning: dispositional, biological, intrapsychic, cognitive/experiential, socio-cultural, and adjustment. To facilitate a broader understanding of the field, the course has been organized more generally according to three units: (1) The Foundation, (2) The Abstract, and (3) The Application. Students who successfully complete this course will be able to discuss research in personality psychology, compare/contrast theoretical perspectives on personality, discuss the associations between personality and health, and apply theory and research to daily life.
PREREQUISITES
Although this course requires basic knowledge of psychological concepts and research methods, class time will not be spent reviewing the required knowledge. The recommended prerequisites for this course are either: (a) Psychology 100, (b) Psychology 101 and 102, or (c) 6 credits of 200-level psychology courses (not including Psychology 205 or 263). First year students are not eligible to take this course.
COURSE FORMAT
This course consists of lectures accompanied by active, in-class discussions and activities that utilize various multimedia platforms (including videos, images, news stories, etc.). A preliminary set of lecture slides/notes will be posted on the website prior to each lecture. Slide outlines are intended as visual aids only; you should take your own notes in class using the slides as a guide.
COURSE WEBSITE / CANVAS
This course uses Canvas (http://canvas.ubc.ca) to make announcements, provide lecture slides/notes before class (by the night before), post grades, and supply any other relevant content to be downloaded by students. Please ensure that this course is registered under your Canvas account. It is your responsibility to check in regularly for important course updates and announcements!
“Who looks outside, dreams; who looks inside, awakes." (Carl Gustav Jung)
2
REQUIRED READING
Personality Psychology: Domains of Knowledge about Human Nature
by Randy Larsen, David Buss, David King, & Carolyn Ensley (1st Canadian Edition, 2017, McGraw Hill)
There are 3 formats to choose from, depending on your preference and needs…
1. Paperback Printed Edition + McGraw Hill Connect with SmartBookϯ (ISBN 9781259649219) 2. Electronic Edition (including McGraw Hill Connect with SmartBookϯ (ISBN 9781259649189) 3. Paperback Printed Edition (Book Only) (ISBN 9781259649134)
ϯMcGraw Hill Connect with SmartBook is an online homework and assessment platform provided by the publisher. It includes electronic access to the textbook as well as self-study resources. Also included is an adaptive version of the textbook called SmartBook and practice questions. This material is optional for students seeking additional support. The class URL is: http://connect.mheducation.com/class/king-summer-2018
You will find a walk-through of the registration process at the following link: http://bit.ly/StudentRegistration Two weeks of free courtesy access to McGraw Hill Connect is provided to all students at the start of the term at the unique registration URL included above. Full access may be purchased at any time.
Other Study Resources: All students have free access to glossary flashcards to assist their studying, located at the following link: http://highered.mheducation.com/sites/125964913x/student_view0/index.html
Other/Older Editions: This is the first Canadian edition of this textbook. No other version should be used.
KEEPING UP WITH YOUR READING
It is recommended that you keep up with readings according to the schedule on the last page of this syllabus. It is not absolutely necessary to have read the corresponding chapter assignments before coming to class.
COURSE EVALUATION Students will be given 3 equally-weighted, non-cumulative exams & the option of writing 1 paper. Evaluation Route 1: For students who do not submit a paper: each exam will comprise 1/3 of your final grade. Evaluation Route 2: For students who submit a paper: each component will comprise 1/4 of your final grade, but only if your paper improves your grade in the course. Otherwise you will be evaluated by Route 1.* + up to 3 bonus percentage points for participating in HSP research (optional; see section on ‘Extra Credit’).
*You do NOT need to notify me ahead of time of your choice. If you hand in a paper and it improves your grade, you will be evaluated according to Evaluation Route 2. If not, you will be evaluated by Evaluation Route 1.
Examinations. All 3 exams are non-cumulative and weighted equally, and therefore are similar in length and scope (i.e., the final exam will not be longer or more burdensome). Two midterm exams will be held during class time (see schedule) while the final exam will be scheduled by during the university exam period.
Exam Content: The exams will consist of multiple choice and written questions (short answer; point form responses are acceptable). The exams will cover both lecture and textbook material; multiple choice questions will be drawn directly from the textbook, while short answer questions will be drawn directly from lectures. The purpose of the lecture is to amplify, explain, and expand upon the textbook material. Although there will be overlap between the lectures and the textbook, there will also be material that will be covered in lectures that is not part of the textbook. Furthermore, some material from the textbook will not be discussed in class (i.e., we will not discuss all textbook material).
3
On Exam Day: Please bring an HB pencil and an eraser to each exam to allow for electronic scoring of the multiple-choice questions. Note that during exams, invigilators may ask students to move or alter students’ seating arrangements with no explanation provided. This may be due to the suspected or observed misconduct of a classmate in an adjacent seat. Note that if you arrive more than 30 minutes late to an exam, you may be refused admittance to the exam and therefore be assigned a grade of “0” on the exam. Students who arrive to an exam after a classmate has completed the exam and left the exam room will not be permitted to write the exam. This applies to all examinations, including midterms. Given restrictions on room capacity, you are STRICTLY PROHIBITED from writing an exam in a section of the course in which you are not enrolled.
Missing an Exam: Examinations will be given on published dates only. Exceptions will be made in cases of medical problems and emergencies, for which documentation will be required. Exceptions will also be made for students who have religious obligations that conflict with an exam date. If you are unable to write an exam due to medical problems, please contact me before the exam or within 24 hours after the exam. Students who do not contact me within 24 hours of the exam will be assigned a grade of “0” on the exam. If you are unable to write an exam due to religious obligations, please notify me within the first 2 weeks of class. Special accommodations cannot be made for purposes of travel or vacations.
Make-Up Exams: If you are unable to write an exam for medical reasons, you are expected to complete it within the shortest time possible at the convenience of the TA. You may be offered only one alternative time to write the exam and it is your responsibility to be accommodating to the TA (i.e., it is not possible to offer multiple dates for make-ups). You are required to contact the TA immediately upon confirming your absence with me in order to schedule the make-up. This is in order to ensure that you write the exam as soon as possible following your illness. Moreover, the content and/or format of the make-up exam may differ from the original version. In instances where you are unable to accommodate the TA’s schedule, or in cases where a make-up exam must be missed, you will be asked to contact Arts Advising to mediate the situation. Like originally scheduled exams, missed make-up exams will only be accommodated with medical documentation. If any of these procedures are not followed, you may receive a grade of ‘0’ on the respective exam. In certain circumstances, including periods in which too many requests for make-up exams have been received, other arrangements may be made, including (but not restricted to) waiving (i.e., excluding) the exam in question.
Exam Grades: Exam grades will be posted on the course website as soon as they are available. Please allow 2 weeks for grades to be posted. Students wishing to view their midterm exams should do so with their TA (at a scheduled review session or by appointment). Students who wish to have their midterm exam re-graded should email me detailing why they think that their exam was unjustly graded within 2 weeks of the grades being posted. Re-grades will not be considered after the 2-week mark, although students are welcome to review their midterm exams at any point during the term. Final examinations must be reviewed directly with me, at a scheduled review session or by appointment. Note that due to minor errors that may occur in grading and/or scoring, exam grades may be adjusted after their original posting. In such corrections, your exam grade may either increase or decrease in order to ensure that all grades reflect an accurate assessment of material.
Optional Paper. You have the option of submitting one written assignment (8-10 pages) during the course. The assignment is to conduct a psychobiography. It is designed to help you think more critically about course content and apply it in an insightful way. Specifically, you will use up to 3 theories of personality (e.g., the five factor model of personality, psychoanalytic theory, attachment theory, or subcomponents of theories depending on breadth and focus) to describe, analyze, and interpret the personality of a specific individual. Students may choose any individual, including themselves, a family member, a friend, a public figure (e.g., a celebrity, a political leader—with the exception of the case studies reviewed in class), or a fictional character (e.g., a character from a novel or movie). [Note: The most difficult personality to analyze may be your own!] Students may choose to focus on the individual’s personality development, their current state, and/or a specific aspect of the individual. The audience for the paper is a person who has completed PSYC-305A.
4
Paper Organization: The paper should be organized as follows: Start with a brief introduction to the person or character. Provide important background information, such as date and place of birth, date of death, residence, family characteristics, etc. In the case of a fictional character, also briefly describe the source. The introduction should end with a thesis statement describing the goals or purpose of the paper. [Approx. ¾ to 1 page for intro.] You will then analyze the person’s personality, applying theories and research (learned in class, presented in the textbook, and/or from other sources) but avoiding lengthy reiterations of course content. Ensure that your analysis is thoughtful and in-depth. You may include interpretations of scores (i.e., ratings of yourself or another) on personality questionnaires to support analyses. [Approx. 6-8 pages for body of paper.) You should then make some concrete conclusions, in which you integrate and connect your analyses, compare and contrast theories and models, discuss limitations of theories and models, and/or formulate broader conclusions about the subject of your analysis. [Approx. 1-1.5 pages for discussion/conclusions.]
Paper Requirements: The written assignment must be typed, double-spaced, in 12-point Times New Roman or similar font, and 8-10 pages in length with 1-inch margins. This is not including your title page and reference section. First-person perspective and direct-quoting are acceptable for this assignment, although the tone should remain formal and non-colloquial (i.e., non-conversational). Although it is not necessary that you use sources of information beyond the lecture material and textbook, the use of additional resources generally strengthens a paper. Accordingly, you are encouraged to cite additional resources (e.g., books, peer-reviewed papers). Note that Wikipedia is not an appropriate source of information to cite in your paper. Any sources of information that are referred to in your paper should be referenced according to the guidelines provided by the American Psychological Association (i.e., APA). If you are not familiar with these guidelines, please refer to the APA Publication Manual or inquire at the University Library for further information. The library has a handout summarizing APA citation procedures available at http://www.library.ubc.ca/pubs/apastyle.pdf. A tutorial on APA style is available at http://www.apastyle.org/learn/tutorials/basics-tutorial.aspx. Headings are optional (but often helpful). When citing lecture content, please use the following formatting:
In-text citation: (King, year)
Example: As was noted in class (King, 2018), Freud’s theory ….
Reference section: King, D. (year). Lecture number [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from http://URL.
Example: King, D. (2018). Lecture 11 [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from http://connect.ubc.ca.
Use lower case letters to distinguish among different lectures in both the in-text citation and reference section:
Example: As was noted in class (King, 2018a), Freud’s theory …. In contrast, Maslow noted… (King, 2018b).
Paper Grading: The paper will be graded for content—that is, how effectively you analyzed the individual’s personality. For example, did you provide a sufficient and accurate review of the theories that you selected? Did you accurately interpret the theories in your analysis of the individual? Did you support your claims with appropriate and sufficient biographical evidence? Did you exhibit thoughtful, independent thinking in your analysis? Were you creative, demonstrating new ways to think about the theories? Did you note the strengths and weaknesses of the theories that you used? Did you compare and contrast the theories in your paper? The paper will also be graded for style, mechanics, and formatting—that is, how well your paper was written. For example, did your paper contain a clear statement of its purpose or objectives (i.e., thesis statement)? Was your writing clear, concise, and easily understood, with appropriate word choice and university-level academic tone? Was your paper well organized, characterized by effective transitions between ideas and a logical flow? Were sources of information paraphrased appropriately and integrated effectively into your writing (if applicable)? Were there errors in punctuation, grammar, or spelling? Did your paper conform to the formatting requirements? Were all sources of information referenced according to APA guidelines? Your paper should be at a level which is representative of a 300 level course and should reflect a high degree of critical thinking.
5
Paper Submission: Hard copies of assignments must be turned in at the start of class on the due date noted in the course schedule, and cannot be emailed or given to me or a TA outside of class. Because this is an optional assignment, no late papers will be accepted in any circumstance and no special accommodations will be made. All papers must ALSO be scanned by “TurnItIn” by 11:59 PM on the day of submission.
TurnItIn: TurnItIn is a service designed to detect and deter plagiarism. Through this service, students’ papers are scanned and compared to over 4.5 billion pages of content located on the Internet or in TurnItIn’s own proprietary databases. The results of comparisons are compiled into customized “Originality Reports” that contain several measures of plagiarism. These reports are forwarded to instructors. Papers that have not been scanned by TurnItIn by midnight on the due date will not be graded and will receive a grade of “0.”
Please submit your paper in the exact same form as the hardcopy submission (i.e., do not remove your title page or reference section). Originality reports of 30–40% or higher should be of concern. If you are worried about potential plagiarism in your paper, it is strongly advised that you submit your paper early to TurnItIn and, in the case that your paper demonstrates significant overlap, make appropriate changes before the final submission. Students will be able to view their originality reports and resubmit before the deadline.
TurnItIn Information: Please visit http://www.turnitin.com and use the following information to submit your paper for this course: Class ID: 18052081, Password: person2018. Note that you must first set up an account if you do not already have one. If you are concerned about security issues involving the use of identifying information (e.g., being stored on U.S. servers), you have the option of creating an alias to use when uploading your paper. In such instances, please note your Turnitin alias on the hardcopy submission of your paper.
Paper Grades: Paper grades will be posted on the course website as soon as they are available. Please allow 2 weeks for grades to be posted. Students wishing to view their paper should make an appointment with the TA. Students who have viewed their paper and who wish to have their paper re-graded should email me detailing why they think that their paper was unjustly graded within 2 weeks of the grades being posted.
Extra Credit. You may earn extra credit for research participation (at a rate of 1/2 point for 1/2 hour, to a maximum of 3 points) or, as an alternative, by completing a library writing project (see HSP information on website listed below). Your earned points are added to your final grade (after any scaling, i.e., before meeting the department’s standards for grade distribution). For complete details, or to register, visit https://ubc-psych.sona-systems.com. Please register in this online system as soon as possible, as deadlines are in place. For additional information, see "Subject Pool Information for Participants" on the above-noted website.
DEPARTMENTAL POLICY ON GRADE DISTRIBUTION
Courses offered by the Psychology Department are required to meet a target grade distribution. This is done in order to ensure that all students are assessed fairly in relation to students in other sections of the same course and to students in other courses. The target grade distribution for 300-level psychology courses requires that the mean for the class fall between 66% and 70%, with a standard deviation of approximately 13%. Accordingly, students should note that the Department may scale the final grades in this course up or down if the distribution of grades deviates substantially from the target. A student’s grade is not official until it appears on their academic record.
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION
The University accommodates students with disabilities who have registered with Access and Diversity (http://www.students.ubc.ca/access/index.cfm). Please let me know in advance, preferably within the first 2 weeks of class, if you require any accommodation on these grounds.
6
ACADEMIC CONCESSION
During your time in this course, if you encounter medical, emotional, or personal problems that affect your attendance or performance, please notify me. You may be able to obtain academic concession from the Dean of your Faculty. Please discuss any extenuating circumstances with me prior to exam dates. For further information on academic concession, please consult Policies and Regulations in the UBC Calendar (http://www.calendar.ubc.ca/vancouver/index.cfm).
CHEATING & ACADEMIC OFFENCES
Cheating, plagiarism, and other forms of academic misconduct are very serious concerns of the University, and the Department of Psychology has taken steps to alleviate them. In the first place, the Department has implemented software that can reliably detect cheating on multiple-choice exams by analyzing the patterns of students’ responses. In addition, the Department subscribes to TurnItIn--a service designed to detect and deter plagiarism. In all cases of suspected academic misconduct, the parties involved will be pursued to the fullest extent dictated by the guidelines of the University. Strong evidence of cheating or plagiarism may result in a zero credit for the work in question. According to the University Act (section 61), the President of UBC has the right to impose harsher penalties including (but not limited to) a failing grade for the course, suspension from the University, cancellation of scholarships, or a notation added to a student’s transcript. All graded work in this course, unless otherwise specified, is to be original work done independently by individuals. If you have any questions as to whether or not what you are doing is even a borderline case of academic misconduct, please consult your instructor. For details on pertinent University policies and procedures, please see Chapter 5 in the UBC Calendar (http://students.ubc.ca/calendar). Further course policies can be obtained from the UBC Calendar on academic regulations.
ATTENDANCE & MISSING CLASS
Although attendance is not recorded, you are responsible for all material covered during class. Should you miss class for any reason, it is your responsibility to find a classmate who is willing to share their notes with you (and you may want to establish this early on in order to better prepare). If your absence is legitimate, then I will be happy to answer questions about the missed material once you have consulted with a fellow student.
IN-CLASS PARTICIPATION
I strongly encourage and appreciate student participation. Participation may be in the form of questions or comments posed during class amongst your classmates or outside of class in discussion with me. I will make every effort to create a classroom environment in which students feel comfortable to discuss their ideas. If, however, you would prefer to share your ideas with me outside of class, you are welcome to see me during my office hours or by appointment. In order to encourage and facilitate participation, I ask that all students support their classmates’ efforts to contribute to class discussion. General course policies can be obtained from the UBC Calendar on academic regulations.
CLASS ETIQUETTE
In consideration of your fellow students, please turn your phones off during class. The use of laptops in class is an effective means to take notes and record comments related to course content. However, some students use laptops in class to surf the internet, engage in e-mail correspondence, and/or work on material associated with other courses. These activities can be very distracting to those who sit in adjacent seats and can interfere with their efforts to focus on course content. For this reason, all students who intend to use laptops in class for activities unrelated to the course are asked to sit in rows at the rear of the classroom. Please also make an effort to type quietly, as such background sounds can be very distracting for others. If you arrive at class late or need to leave early, do so with minimal disruption.
7
RESPECT & DECENCY
I will only ever tolerate an inclusive, respectful, and safe classroom environment. The opinions and perspectives of all individuals are valued and respected, no matter their age, gender, ability, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or gender identity. To this end, and in support of UBC’s Positive Space campaign, I further aim to foster a classroom atmosphere that is receptive to and welcoming of LGBTQ people and issues (see http://positivespace.ubc.ca). All individuals in the classroom should feel safe to express their thoughts and opinions without judgment, ridicule, or discrimination. As such, thoughts and opinions should only ever be shared in a respectful manner. In regards to more sensitive issues, it is advisable that students “think before they speak.” If a particular statement or behaviour might offend someone or make an individual feel alienated or threatened in any way, it should not be shared. Educated and respectful opinions, on the other hand, are always welcome. Students should familiarize themselves with UBC’s policy on maintaining a Respectful Environment on campus and in the classroom: http://www.hr.ubc.ca/respectful-environment/
COMMUNICATION WITH INSTRUCTOR & TA
Complex questions are typically easier to answer face-to-face, rather than via e-mail. In addition to the instructor, the TA is a great resource and will be able to provide you with answers to many of your questions. The TA works in close contact with the instructor and will refer matters if they cannot resolve them for you. We take your questions very seriously and want to facilitate learning. For practical reasons, please allow at least 24 hours for us to reply, particularly just prior to exams when student requests tend to be high. If the response to your question or concern is already answered in this syllabus, you will not receive a response by email.
REQUESTS FOR LETTERS OF REFERENCE
During your academic career, you may require a letter of reference or recommendation (for admission into a graduate or diploma program, to apply for a research job, etc.). Unfortunately, I will not be able to accommodate all requests for such letters. I am only willing to write letters for those students who engage in the course material beyond simply attending class and writing exams. This means that in order for such a request to be considered, you must participate in class discussion and/or visit me during office hours to discuss course material (i.e., I must know who you are!). I am also unwilling to write letters for students whose standing grade in the course is below a 75. If these criteria are met, sufficient notice must be provided and accommodation is still not guaranteed. I can only write letters for a limited number of students each term.
LEARNING RESOURCES
There are a number of useful resources available on and off campus to assist students in their learning goals:
Study Support: Learning Commons (http://learningcommons.ubc.ca/) is an online resource designed to provide UBC students with learning and study support. It is an interactive website that provides access to information on exam preparation, tutoring, on-campus learning workshops, study groups, and technical tools. The University of Northern British Columbia (UNBC) has a number of useful learning resources available for students online. A series of helpful study skills handouts (e.g., concentration tips, memory strategies) from UNBC can be found at: http://www.unbc.ca/lsc/index.html.
Writing Support: UBC students may obtain assistance with writing through the UBC Writing Centre (http://www.writingcentre.ubc.ca/). The Writing Centre offers courses, tutoring services, and an online Writer’s Workshop to assist students in developing their writing skills. The UBC Library (http://www.library.ubc.ca/home/instruct/) provides online information to assist students in conducting library searches for papers. Time Management: Resources to assist you in managing your time across courses are available at: http://www.arc.sbc.edu/timeschedule.html.
8
HEALTH & WELLNESS RESOURCES
You may at some point find yourself struggling to manage your health (mental or physical) while in school. Below is a list of health-related resources on and off campus that you may wish to utilize.
Access and Diversity: Access and Diversity provides accommodations for UBC students living with physical or mental disabilities. Website: students.ubc.ca/about/access | Phone Number: 604-822-5844
BC Crisis Center: Non-profit, volunteer-driven organization that provides emotional support to youth, adults, and seniors in crisis in BC. Crisis line available 24/7. Website: crisiscentre.bc.ca | Phone Number: 604-872-3311
Distress Line: If you are in distress or are worried about someone in distress who may hurt themselves, call 1-800-SUICIDE 24 hours a day to connect to a BC crisis line, without a wait or busy signal.
Counselling Services at UBC: Counselling services offers a variety of resources to help you maintain your mental health while in school. You may see a counsellor on an individual basis, attend group counselling, or to document an illness if you should require academic concession. Website: students.ubc.ca/livewell/services/counselling-services | Phone Number: 604-822-3811
The Kaleidoscope: A confidential peer-run mental health support group that takes place on campus at least once a week. You may attend the group if you are experiencing any kind of mental health related challenges, or if you’re just feeling stressed about school in general. Registration is not required to attend the group. See the website for meeting times and locations. Food and drink are provided. Website: the-kaleidoscope.com
Live Well, Learn Well: The Live Well, Learn Well initiative is a resource hub that provides students with information to help improve physical and mental wellbeing. Website: students.ubc.ca/livewelllearnwell
Mental Health Awareness Club: A club that offers opportunities to speak about mental health with others and strives to promote mental health awareness throughout the UBC community.
Website: ubcmhac.sites.olt.ubc.ca/
Mood Disorders Clinic UBC: A psychiatric program designed specifically to treat individuals living with depression or bipolar disorder. Website: ubc-mooddisorders.vch.ca/
Pacific Spirit Addiction Services: A free and confidential service for youth and young adults up to the age of 24. Services include counselling, access to an addiction physician - including usage of a methadone maintenance program - and a drug education series. Phone Number: 604-267-3970
Psychology Clinic at UBC: Professional psychological services provided to the community, including assessment & treatment for children, adults & families by clinical psychology trainees. Website: clinic.psych.ubc.ca
SHARE: Self Harm Anonymous Recovery and Education is a program designed to promote self-care and educate about self-harm. SHARE support groups meet biweekly; times and locations can be found on their website.
Website: www.vivreshare.org
Student Health Services at UBC: Student health provides students with a variety of healthcare related services to help you maintain your health while studying. Access to doctors and registered nurses.
Website: students.ubc.ca/livewell/services/student-health-service | Phone Number: 604- 822-7011
Wellness Centre at UBC: Speak with other UBC students about tips for managing stress, keeping healthy sleep and eating patterns, concerns about safe sex, etc. Website: students.ubc.ca/livewell/services/wellness-centre
9
PSYC-305A Personality Psychology Schedule of Lectures, Readings, & Exams
*Although it is recommended that you read Chapters 1 and 2, you will not be tested directly on their content. You are NOT responsible for reading Chapters 7, 15, or 20, though some of this material may appear in lecture. Dates: Lecture # and Topics: Keep up with your textbook readings!  Readings: UNIT 1 UNIT 1  The Foundation: Basic Principles & Considerations ❶ Steve Jobs May 15 1. INTRODUCTION TO PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY Chs. 1*, 2*
Syllabus Review; Defining Personality; Personality Assessment May 17–22 2. GETTING ORGANIZED, CLASSIFIED – AND STUCK? Chs. 3, 4, 5
Traits & Trait Taxonomies; Personality Stability & Change Over Space & Time May 24 3. DETERMINING NATURE, NURTURE, & NECESSITY Chs. 6, 8
Behavioural Genetics, Genetic & Evolutionary Perspectives on Personality May 29 *EXAM #1* (1 hour 20 minutes, in class – no lecture to follow exam) UNIT 2 UNIT 2  The Abstract: Theoretical Perspectives on Psyche & Self ❷ Donald Trump May 31 4. PROBING THE PSYCHE: THE WORK OF S. FREUD & C.G. JUNG Ch. 9 Psychoanalytic & Analytical Theories of Personality & Development June 5 5. EXPANDING PERSPECTIVES: THE PSYCHE BEYOND SEX & FREUD Chs. 10, 12 Neo-Analytic Contributions; Object Relations Theory; Narcissism June 7 6. NAVIGATING SELF, FROM PERCEPTION TO ACTUALIZATION Chs. 14, 11 Approaches to the Self; Motives, Needs, & Goals; Actualization & Authenticity June 12 *EXAM #2* (1 hour 20 minutes, in class – no lecture to follow exam) UNIT 3 UNIT 3  The Application: Exploring Practical & Applied Contexts ❸ Malala Yousafzai June 14 7. SOCIALIZED & SYSTEMIZED: PERSONALITY IN CONTEXT Chs. 16, 17
Social Interaction; Culture & Personality; Sex & Gender; Intersectionality June 19 8. DEALING WITH THE DAY-TO-DAY: ADJUSTMENT & RESILIENCE Chs. 13, 18
Stress, Coping, & Health; Emotion & Personality; The Concept of Disorder June 21 9. THE GOOD, THE BAD, & THE BIGGER PICTURE Ch. 19
Personality Disorders; Positive Psychology; Course Summary & Wrap-Up
June 21
*OPTIONAL PAPER DUE AT START OF CLASS* (and to TurnItIn by 11:59 PM) June 15–29 *EXAM #3* (1 hour 40 minutes, to be scheduled during university exam period)