DEPARTMENT OF LANGUAGE STUDIES UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
Course Code
LIN102H5 LEC0101 & LEC0102
Course Title
Introduction to General Linguistics: Words, Sentences, their Structure and Meaning
Term
Winter 2024
Instructor
Prof. Emily Atkinson (LIN102.utm@course.utoronto.ca)
LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto operates. For thousands of years it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and the Mississaugas of the Credit. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous people from across Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land.
Source: UTM Land Acknowledgement
COURSE LOCATION & TIME
Course Website
http://q.utoronto.ca
Class Time
LEC0101: Thursdays, 11am – 1pm
LEC0102: Thursdays 3 – 5pm
Class location
LEC0101: KN 137
LEC0102: IB 110
Office Location
MN 4150 or Zoom
(alternating, see Quercus)
Office Hours
Tuesdays 12 – 2pm
TA Office Hours
TBD (online)
TA names
Kaz Bamba
Angelika Kiss
Justin Leung
Christy Moser
Kate Prigaro
Jessica Yeung
TA email
N/A – please do not email TAs
Tutorial Times
All sections meet on Mondays
Tutorial location
See ACORN / Quercus
9 – 10am
TUT0101; TUT0102; TUT0103
10 – 11am
TUT0104; TUT0105; TUT0106
11am – 12pm
TUT0107; TUT0108; TUT0109
5 – 6pm
TUT0110; TUT0111; TUT0112
6 – 7pm
TUT0113; TUT0114; TUT0115
7 – 8pm
TUT0116; TUT0117
NOTE: Every student must be enrolled in a lecture section (LEC0101 or LEC0102) and a tutorial section. You must attend the tutorial section in which you are registered. Please see ACORN for room location.
Page 2 of 13
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Lectures on fundamental principles of morpho-syntax, syntax, and semantics with illustrations from English and a broad spectrum of other languages. Practice in elementary analytic techniques and applications from acquisition, historical linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics. REQUIRED COURSE FOR ANY PROGRAM IN LINGUISTICS.
Prerequisites: This course has no prerequisite. It can be taken independently, before, or after LIN101H5. Exclusions: LIN100Y5 or LIN100Y1 or LIN102H1 or LINA01H3 or LINA02H3.
Distribution Requirement: Humanities Total Instructional Hours: 24L/12T Mode of Delivery: In Class
Learning Outcomes
Upon successful completion of the course, students will be able to:
• Use linguistic terminology & formal conventions accurately
• Contrast the theoretical frameworks adopted in the course & recognise their distinctive approach to linguistic analysis
• Classify linguistic units / phenomena
• Recognise linguistic units of structure and meaning & demonstrate some of the rule systems that govern them
• Show & discuss the abstract representation of a word or utterance
• Analyse meaning both in terms of its connection to linguistic structure & its connection to discourse factors
• Summarise the key challenges faced by adults in processing language in real time & by children learning their first language
• Support an analysis using basic methods of argumentation
• Extend analyses to other phenomena & languages other than English
• Describe ways in which linguistic analysis can be applied to everyday life
Textbooks and Other Materials
Textbook: Anderson, C. et al. (2022) Essentials of Linguistics, 2nd edition. Pressbooks. Required
• Available online for free (and open access): https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/essentialsoflinguistics2/
Some additional readings from sources outside of the textbook may be required or recommended. All other readings and supplementary materials will be posted to Quercus.
Piazza: This term we will be using Piazza for class discussion. The system is highly catered to getting you help fast and efficiently from classmates, the TAs, and myself. Rather than emailing questions, you should post your questions on Piazza. If you have any problems or feedback for the developers, email team@piazza.com.
There will be a link in the navigation pane of the Quercus site, but you can also find our class signup link at: https://piazza.com/utoronto.ca/winter2024/lin102h5
Page 3 of 13
IMPORTANT COURSE INFORMATION
Lectures begin the week of January 8th. The first lecture will take place on January 11th.
The first tutorial will take place on January 15th.
Official information regarding campus closures is posted on the UTM Campus Status page.
Tri-campus information is available on the UofT Campus Status webpage.
Expectations
Your active, informed participation is essential for a quality learning experience for both you and your peers. Students are expected to attend the lectures and to have read the assigned material before lecture. Please also check the course announcements regularly for important messages.
Please begin preparing / studying for all assignments / tests well in advance. Tasks left to the last minute create unnecessary stress that negatively impacts your physical and mental wellness.
Please attend the tutorial section in which you are registered. You will not receive tutorial exercise marks if you attend a tutorial section other than the one in which you are registered.
You must bring a pen or pencil to every tutorial. You will not be able to complete your required exercises without pen and paper.
When you interact in person or online, treat me, your TAs, and fellow students with respect; abusive and offensive behaviour will not be tolerated.
To protect the privacy of students and to encourage more active participation, lectures, tutorials, and office hours will not be recorded. You are prohibited from recording these sessions, except in the case of a valid accessibility accommodation. If you require such an accommodation, please make sure to get in touch with Accessibility Services as soon as possible.
Email Policy
E-mail should be primarily for specific administrative issues, e.g., accommodation, scheduling an appointment, informing me of illness, etc. Questions about broad course procedures or the content of the course can be asked in class, in tutorial, during office hours, during a scheduled appointment, or on Piazza.
If you are sending me an e-mail directly:
• Include the course code (LIN102) in the subject line.
• Address me using my professional title: Professor Atkinson, Prof. Atkinson, or Dr. Atkinson are all acceptable.
• Close your email message with your name (as you wish me to address you).
• I will only respond to @mail.utoronto.ca email addresses.
• Allow 48 hours (excluding weekends) for an answer.
Office Hour Policy
Office hours will alternate being held online and in-person. More details about this schedule will be available on Quercus. A Zoom link will be provided on Quercus for online office hours. I may request that you wear a mask for any in-person meetings. All students will be admitted to my
Page 4 of 13
office at the same time. Please note that due to the size of the course, you may be limited in the number of questions / the amount of time that a direct interaction occurs. Additional TA Office Hours will be held online (day & time TBD).
Please don’t be shy, and come to office hours if you have questions about anything or just want to chat about linguistics! Think of office hours as a part of the course and a way for us to connect – they are not just a help session!
If you and / or a group of fellow classmates cannot attend the regularly scheduled office hours (or if you would like to discuss a private concern), email me to arrange a meeting at an alternate time.
• Make sure to include several concrete suggestions for meeting times:
 Do you have time to meet next week?
 I can meet on Monday or Thursday.
✓ I am available Monday from 10am-12pm or after 3pm, Tuesday after 2pm, or Friday between 10am and 3pm.
• The usual 48-hour email response time applies, so please make sure to reach out well in advance of your availability.
Enrollment Conflict
Students who enroll in courses with conflicting lectures, tutorials, lab, or practicals (scheduled at the same or overlapping time slot) may NOT receive accommodations for conflicting tests, quizzes, assignments, lecture material, in-class participation and attendance.
Source: Academic Calendar
Copyright for Instructional Materials
Please be advised that the intellectual property rights in the material referred to on this syllabus (and posted on the course site) belong to the course instructor or other persons. You are not authorized to reproduce or distribute such material, in any form or medium, without the prior consent of the intellectual property owner. Violation of intellectual property rights may be a violation of the law and University of Toronto policies and may entail significant repercussions for the person found to have engaged in such act. If you have any questions regarding your right to use the material in a manner other than as set forth in the syllabus, please speak to your instructor.
Winter 2024 - Important Dates
• January 8, 2024 – Y courses resume and S courses begin.
• January 21, 2024 – Waitlist ends for S courses. Last day to add or change a section in an S course on ACORN.
• February 19, 2024 – Last day to drop a Y course from academic record
• February 19, 2024 – Family Day; University closed
• February 20, 2024–February 23, 2024 – Winter Reading Week
• March 11, 2024 – Last day to drop an S course from academic record
• March 29, 2024 – Good Friday; University closed
• April 5, 2024 – Last day of Y & S classes
• April 8, 2024 – Make-up Day
• April 9, 2024–April 10, 2024 – Study Break
• April 11, 2024–April 25, 2024 – Final exam period for Y & S courses
Please check the UTM Registrar’s website for detailed deadlines.
Page 5 of 13
EVALUATION COMPONENTS
Item
Weight
Due Date
Method
Tutorial Exercises
Best 9 out of 11
15%
Ongoing during tutorial
In-person (written; bring a pencil or pen!)
Homework Quizzes
20%
Biweekly; due Mondays at 9am EST
Submit on Quercus (multiple choice)
Written Homework
30%
Biweekly; due Mondays at 9am EST
Submit on Quercus (written)
Final Exam
35%
April exam period (TBA)
In-person (written)
Tutorial Exercises (15%):
There will be weekly exercises completed during your tutorial. These will be completed the old-fashioned way, so bring a pen or a pencil! These will be marked on a simple check minus / check / check plus scale. Only your 9 highest marks will count, so use the 2 dropped assignments strategically; pay attention to any commitments that may overlap with your tutorial time and plan accordingly. No make-ups for these exercises will be offered – if you miss your tutorial due to illness or other circumstances beyond your control (including enrollment issues), these missed exercise will count toward your “forgiven” marks.
Homework Quizzes (20%):
There will be 5 homework quizzes assigned throughout the semester, which are due biweekly at 9:00am EST on Monday (see schedule below). These alternate with written homework assignments. These quizzes will be administered as Quercus quizzes with a limited window in which they are available, as well as a limited amount of time to complete them. They will consist of multiple choice questions and other similar question styles (true / false, matching, fill-in-the-blank, etc.).
These quizzes are open book, meaning that you can consult any materials from class including lecture slides, your notes, and the textbook. You may not work on the quizzes with other students – this constitutes a violation of the academic integrity policy.
Written Homework (30%):
There will be 5 written homework assignments assigned throughout the semester, which are due biweekly at 9:00am EST on Monday (see schedule below). These alternate with homework quizzes. These homework assignments will focus on applying your knowledge to problem sets and will provide good practice for solving these kinds of questions on the final exam.
You may work on these assignments with other students, but each student must write their answers in their own words and turn in their own version of the homework. On each submission, you must indicate whether or not you worked with anyone (working alone is, of course, permissible) and, if so, list the names of those you worked with at the top of the assignment; failure to do this will result in an academic integrity violation. It is quite easy to identify suspiciously similar answers, so make sure not to forget to include this list! All assignments will be uploaded to Quercus and should
Page 6 of 13
be typed, unless special arrangements are made in advance. Tree diagrams or special symbols can be drawn by hand, and I will provide you some options for submitting these special cases throughout the semester.
Final Exam (35%):
The final exam will take place in-person during the final examination period. It will be closed-book and cumulative. While some material may require memorization, the final will mostly require you to think about problems and analyse data that you have not seen before.
No “extra work” to boost your grade at the end of the course will be allowed. The Department of Language Studies does not permit such an arrangement. Should you need “special consideration” for missed works due to illness or extenuating circumstances beyond your control, see the Special Consideration section below.
GRADING SCHEME
Students are assigned a grade in each course as follows:
Percentage
Grade
Value
Grade Definitions
90 - 100
A+
4.0
85 - 89
A
4.0
80 - 84
A-
3.7
Excellent
Strong evidence of original thinking; good organization, capacity to analyze and synthesize; superior grasp of subject matter with sound critical evaluations; evidence of extensive knowledge base.
77 - 79
B+
3.3
73 - 76
B
3.0
70 - 72
B-
2.7
Good
Evidence of grasp of subject matter, some evidence of critical capacity and analytic ability; reasonable understanding of relevant issues; evidence of familiarity with the literature.
67 - 69
C+
2.3
63 - 66
C
2.0
60 - 62
C-
1.7
Adequate
Student who is profiting from their university experience; understanding of the subject matter; ability to develop solutions to simple problems in the material.
57 - 59
D+
1.3
53 - 56
D
1.0
50 - 52
D-
0.7
Marginal
Some evidence of familiarity with subject matter and some evidence that critical and analytic skills have been developed.
0 - 49
F
0.0
Inadequate
Little evidence of even superficial understanding of subject matter; weakness in critical and analytical skills, with limited or irrelevant use of literature.
Source: Academic Calendar – Grades and Academic Records
PROCEDURES AND RULES
ACADEMIC GUIDELINES
It is your responsibility to ensure that you have met all prerequisites listed in the UTM Academic Calendar 2023-2024 for this course. If you lack prerequisites, you may be removed from the course up until the last day to add a course. If you do not have the prerequisites, you have the option to submit a prerequisite waiver request to the Department. Prerequisite waiver requests must be submitted before the first day of classes. Further information about academic regulations, course
Page 7 of 13
withdrawal dates, and credits can be found in the University of Toronto Mississauga Academic Calendar. Please ensure that you comply with and understand all of the academic and non-academic policies, rules and regulations of the University as set out in the Calendar.
PENALTIES FOR LATENESS
Tutorial exercises and homework quizzes: These cannot be made up for any reason. Missed tutorial exercises are covered by the policy to drop your two worst marks. Homework quizzes are administered online and you will have a window of time to complete them, so you should be able to find a time that is convenient to do so during this window.
Written homework assignments: A penalty of 5% per calendar day (i.e., including weekends and holidays, during which students are not able to submit term work) up to 6 days after the deadline will be applied by the Instructor.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
Students who miss an assessment due to circumstances beyond their control (e.g., illness or an accident) can request that the Department grant them special consideration. Students must follow the appropriate procedure (see below).
➢ For assessments worth 10% or less
Individual Course Instructors have discretion about the way they grant special consideration. If you miss work worth less than 10% for reasons beyond your control (i.e. emergencies), you may submit a request for special consideration directly to the instructor within 48hrs of the deadline of the missed work. Note that such requests will only be considered for tutorial exercises if the student has already used both of their forgiven / dropped assignments. Requests for extensions for non-emergency reasons must be submitted to the instructor prior to the deadline of the work.
➢ For assessments worth more than 10%
If you miss an assessment or assessment deadline that is worth more than 10% (e.g., assignment, midterm, final test, quiz, etc.) for reasons beyond your control, you may submit a request for special consideration within two days of the missed deadline or test/quiz date. To submit your request, you MUST
1) complete the Special Consideration Form online on the Department of Language Studies website, and upload any requested documentation on the Form, and
2) submit the assessment as soon as possible after the due date (even if you have not received a decision on your special consideration request). If your special consideration request is approved, follow up with your instructor as soon as possible.
ACORN Absence Declaration Tool (one-time only per term) – NEW for 2023-2024
New for 2023-2024, absence declaration on ACORN will be limited to one absence of maximum 7 days per term.
An absence declared on ACORN will not require additional supporting documentation. However, you must still notify your instructor as soon as possible (within 2 days of the missed deadline), and complete the Special Consideration Form online on the Department of Language Studies website.
If your absence exceeds 7 days, you may be asked to provide additional supporting documentation (e.g., Verification of Illness Form or Verification of Extenuating Circumstances).
Page 8 of 13
The absence declaration tool cannot be used for matters that require a petition (e.g., missed final exam/final assessments). The ACORN absence declaration tool also may not be used for either of your first two forgiven / dropped tutorial exercises or if you have already declared an absence on ACORN during the academic term.
Please follow the appropriate procedure and submit any requested supporting documentation.
➢ Missed Final Exam
If your course has a scheduled final exam during the final exam period, please consult the guidelines set by the Office of the Registrar. Students who cannot complete their final examination due to illness or other serious causes must file an online petition within 72 hours of the missed examination. Late petitions will NOT be considered. Upon approval of a deferred exam request, a non-refundable fee of $72 is required for each examination approved.
IMPORTANT NOTES TO STUDENTS
The Department evaluates special consideration requests carefully and approval is not guaranteed.
✓ You may not submit a special consideration request to re-write a test/quiz once the test has begun.
✓ If you are feeling ill, you must leave the session/room before starting your test/quiz and seek medical attention immediately.
✓ Reasons such as vacations, pre-purchased plane tickets, family plans (unless critical, such as death of an immediate family member), lack of preparation, late course registration, traffic delays, or conflicting course deadlines are not considered to be beyond a student’s control and will NOT be accommodated.
✓ If you do not complete the make-up as and when required, you will receive a grade of zero for the original missed test; further special consideration is NOT permitted.
✓ Should your special consideration request be approved, no further consideration can be applied to the same request.
False statements and/or documentation will be treated as academic offences and handled accordingly.
For more detailed procedures and information, please consult the guidelines in the Academic Calendar.
ACADEMIC HONESTY AND PLAGIARISM
UTM wishes to remind students that they are expected to adhere to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters regardless of the course delivery method. UTM expects that students will maintain the same academic honesty and integrity both in a classroom setting and online.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or from other institutional resources.
Potential academic offences include, but are not limited to:
Page 9 of 13
- Using any unauthorized aids on an exam or test (e.g., "cheat sheets," cell phones, electronic devices, etc.)
- Representing someone else's work or words as your own -- plagiarism
- Falsifying documents or grades
- Purchasing and selling an essay
- Submitting someone else's work as your own or providing your answers to someone else
- Submitting the same essay or report in more than one course (without permission)
- Looking at someone else's answers during an exam or test
- Sharing your answers during an exam or test
- Utilizing someone else’s answers (e.g., getting help from a tutor) in an exam and test
- Impersonating another person at an exam or test or having someone else impersonate you
- Making up sources or facts for an essay or report
- Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments
- Using technological aids (e.g., software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment
- Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media
- Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual “course groups”
- Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually
Plagiarism is a serious offence, and it can take several different forms. Two of the most common are:
1) handing in work that was done in conjunction with or by another student and passing it off as your own; and
2) using published work(s) in a way that does not give credit to the author.
From the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: “It shall be an offence for a student to knowingly: represent as one's own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in any academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work, i.e. to commit plagiarism. Wherever in the Code an offence is described as depending on "knowing”, the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.” All students must refer to these websites to obtain information on what constitutes plagiarism:
https://www.utm.utoronto.ca/academic-integrity/students
http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/using-sources/how-not-to-plagiarize
If questions arise after reading the material on the websites, consult your instructor.
Plagiarism will not be tolerated.
USE OF GENERATIVE AI IN ASSIGNMENTS
Students may not copy or paraphrase from any generative artificial intelligence applications, including ChatGPT and other AI writing and coding assistants, for the purpose of completing assignments in this course. In the event that it is found out that you used generative AI to generate the content of your answers on assignments, this will be considered an academic offence and will be handled as such. This course policy is designed to promote your learning and intellectual development and to help you reach course learning outcomes.
Page 10 of 13
EQUITY, DIVERSITY, AND INCLUSION STATEMENT
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or harassment against any persons or communities.
Discrimination, harassment and hate speech will not be tolerated. If you have any questions, comments, or concerns you may visit the UTM Equity, Diversity and Inclusion office or the University of Toronto Mississauga Students’ Union Vice President Equity at vpequity@utmsu.ca.
As part of this commitment, the instructor will arrange reasonable accommodations due to religious observances. “Students have a responsibility to alert members of the teaching staff in a timely fashion to upcoming religious observances and anticipated absences.” Since students would normally be aware of upcoming religious observances as well as examination schedules in advance, a minimum of three weeks advance notice should be considered sufficient.
Source: U of T, Vice-Provost, Student Accommodation
ACADEMIC RIGHTS
You, as a student at UTM, have the right to:
- receive a course syllabus either through accessing a copy on Quercus or through the UTM
Timetable Builder by the first day of class;
- rely upon the information detailed within a course syllabus once the course has started. An instructor may only change methods of evaluation, or their relative weight, by following the University Assessment and Grading Practices Policy provision Part B: 1.3;
- have access to your instructor for consultation during a course or follow up with the department chair if the instructor is unavailable;
- ask the person who marked your term work for a re-evaluation if you feel it was not fairly graded. You have up to one month from the date of return of the work to inquire about the mark. If you are not satisfied with a re-evaluation, you may appeal to the instructor in charge of the course if the instructor did not mark the work. If your work is remarked, you must accept the resulting mark. You may only appeal a mark beyond the instructor if the term work was worth at least 20% of the course mark;
- receive at least one significant mark (15% for H courses, 25% for Y courses) before the last day you can drop a course for H courses, and the last day of classes in the first week of January for Y courses taught in the Fall/Winter terms;
- submit handwritten essays so long as they are neatly written;
- have no assignment worth 100% of your final grade;
- not have a term test or combination of term tests in an individual course be worth 25% or more in the last two weeks of class;
- retain intellectual property rights to your term work;
- receive all your assignments, tests, and other term work once graded;
- view your final exams. To see a final exam, you must submit an online Exam Reproduction Request within 6 months of the exam. There is a small non-refundable fee;
- privacy of your final grades;
Page 11 of 13
- arrange for representation from Downtown Legal Services (DLS), a representative from the UTM Students’ Union (UTMSU), and/or other forms of support if you are charged with an academic offence.
STUDENT RESOURCES
ACCESSIBILITY
Students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. In particular, if you have a disability/health consideration that may require accommodations, please feel free to approach me and/or Accessibility Services as soon as possible.
Accessibility staff (located in room 2037, Davis Building) are available by appointment to assess specific needs, provide referrals and arrange appropriate accommodations. Please call 905-569-4699 or email access.utm@utoronto.ca. The sooner you let us know your needs the quicker we can assist you in achieving your learning goals in this course.
WELLNESS AND MENTAL HEALTH
➢ UTM Mental Health Resources
➢ Student Mental Health Resource –U of T My Student Support Program
➢ Health and Counselling Centre
STUDENT EMERGENCIES
Any student who has difficulty affording groceries or accessing sufficient food to eat every day, who lacks a safe and stable place to live, or who experiences an emergency requiring financial support beyond their means and believes this may affect their performance in this course is urged to contact Student Affairs & Services (SAS), the UTM Student Union (UTMSU), or Prof. Atkinson for support.
➢ UTM Food Centre – free food for UTM students
➢ UTMSU Free Breakfast Wednesdays – register through the link on this site
➢ Downtown Legal Services – pro bono legal advice for students on a variety of issues
RGASC
The Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre (RGASC) is located in Room 3251 on the third floor of the Maanjiwe nendamowinan Building. The RGASC offers individual consultations, workshops (many CCR-accredited), and a wide range of programs to help students identify and develop the academic skills they need for success in their studies. In Fall 2023, their programming will include both in-person and online options. Visit the RGASC website to explore their online resources, book an in-person or online appointment, or learn about other programming such as Writing Retreats, the Program for Accessing Research Training (PART), Mathematics and Numeracy Support, and dedicated resources for English Language Learners.
UTM Library
The University of Toronto Libraries connect students with the world-class collections needed to successfully conduct research and complete assignments. At the UTM Library, located within the Hazel McCallion Academic Learning Centre, students will find dedicated support for their courses:
- Reference and Research Help via in-person drop-in and the Ask a Librarian virtual chat service
Page 12 of 13
- Research guides developed by subject expert liaison librarians, plus individual consultations on request
- Workshops on navigating databases, finding relevant articles, using software, citing correctly, and more
OTHERS
➢ For a variety of other student support services and resources – visit the "current students" section of the UTM website
Page 13 of 13
COURSE SCHEDULE
Week
Date
Topic
Reading1
Assignment
1
Jan 8 (M)
No tutorial
Complete syllabus quiz for access to rest of course materials
Jan 11 (Th)
Lecture 1: Introduction
Chapter 1
2 Jan 15 (M) Tutorial 1
Jan 18 (Th)
Lecture 2: Morphology I
Chapter 5
3 Jan 22 (M) Tutorial 2 Quiz 1 due (9am)
Jan 25 (Th)
Lecture 3: Morphology II
Chapter 5
4 Jan 29 (M) Tutorial 3 Homework 1 due (9am)
Feb 1 (Th)
Lecture 4: Syntax I
Chapter 6
5 Feb 5 (M) Tutorial 4 Quiz 2 due (9am)
Feb 8 (Th)
Lecture 5: Syntax II
Chapter 6
6 Feb 12 (M) Tutorial 5 Homework 2 due (9am)
Feb 15 (Th)
Lecture 6: Syntax III
Chapter 6
7 Feb 19 (M) No tutorial (Family Day) Feb 22 (Th) No lecture (reading week)
8
Feb 26 (M) Tutorial 6 Quiz 3 due (9am)
Feb 29 (Th)
Lecture 7: Syntax IV; Sentence Processing I
Chapter 6; TBA
9
Mar 4 (M) Tutorial 7 Homework 3 due (9am)
Mar 7 (Th)
Lecture 8: Sentence Processing II; Language Acquisition
TBA; Chapter 11 (11.1-2; 11.6-11.9)
10
Mar 11 (M) Tutorial 8 Quiz 4 due (9am)
Mar 14 (Th)
Lecture 9: Semantics I
Chapter 7
11
Mar 18 (M) Tutorial 9 Homework 4 due (9am)
Mar 21 (Th)
Lecture 10: Semantics II
Chapter 7
12
Mar 25 (M) Tutorial 10 Quiz 5 due (9am)
Mar 28 (Th)
Lecture 11: Pragmatics I
Chapter 8
13
Apr 1 (M) Tutorial 11 Homework 5 due (9am)
Apr 4 (Th)
Lecture 12: Pragmatics II
Chapter 8
Exam review
TBA
Consult Quercus for help lab hours in the time leading up to the exam.
Final exam
TBA, April 11 – 25
Cumulative as scheduled by the Registrar
1 Readings are from the required textbook, Essentials of Linguistics (2nd edition), unless otherwise noted.