Department of Entrepreneurship & Strategy
ENT56
Entrepreneurial Skills Development
Course Outline V1.1 Fall-Winter 2022/23
Our goal is to provide students with a deeply experiential and transformative learning experience in a vibrant urban environment.
We:
empower students with a philosophy of entrepreneurial thinking, passion, and action-orientation that they can apply to their lives, their jobs, their communities, and/or their own new ventures.
ignite students' passions and empower them to achieve extraordinary goals. Canada’s pre-eminent and largest entrepreneurship program, we deliver innovative educational programs and support multi-disciplinary experiences across campus with local, national and global impact.
provide access to world-class support and funding for our students’ new ventures and are embedded within our community.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 2 of 15
Entrepreneurial Skills Development
ENT 56 – Fall-Winter 2022/23
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION
Instructor / GA:
Brad Poulos
Jessica Da Silva
Office Telephone:
Please use email.
E-mail Address:
bpoulos@ryerson.ca (you MUST use your Ryerson email address)
jessica3.dasilva@ryerson.ca
Office Location:
Virtual
Consultation Hours:
By appointment
Class Location:
TRS 1-075
Class Time:
Monday 10:00 to 13:00
COURSE INFORMATION
Prerequisites: ENT 526 and ENT 601
CALENDAR COURSE DESCRIPTION
This is a two-semester deeply experiential and transformative learning experience for entrepreneurship majors. Students work in a team to develop hands-on skills within Toronto’s entrepreneurship ecosystem. This group project may be a new company, social innovation, or intrapreneurship within an existing venture. Individually, students deepen their entrepreneurial skills to deliver an individual opportunity portfolio and an individual new venture opportunity suitable for a potential new venture during their capstone ENT 78AB course.
COURSE OVERVIEW
This is a two-semester-long pre-capstone course for 3rd year entrepreneurship majors. Through the ENT prerequisite courses you are familiar with entrepreneurs, the entrepreneurial process, opportunity spotting, agile lean start-up methods, rapid prototyping, and project management. It is intended that this course will help you acquire and practice the key skills and competencies required to be an entrepreneur (or intrapreneur, social entrepreneur). It is an intensive experiential learning course where you will be expected to work a significant number of hours (10+ hours per week) gaining hands-on experience outside of class. In addition, the assignments in this course will help you to refine and strengthen your skills in managing yourself, people, and projects. The course will help you hone your thinking skills, ability to communicate in written and oral forms, problem solving skills, and personal organization and time management skills. You will flex and build your entrepreneurial muscles. Learning to exceed your current capacity is fundamental to building stronger muscles.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 3 of 15
COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students will have achieved the following learning outcomes:
• ENT Goal 1: Opportunity Identification – Developing a self-directed life-long learning process for developing ‘T’ shaped skill profiles with depth and expertise in a domain as well as broad skills for identifying future trends. Students will practice identifying and analyzing opportunities using a variety of tools and techniques.
• ENT Goal 2: Resource Acquisition – Implementing design thinking and the lean start-up method multiple times to validate opportunities and bootstrap to obtain resources. Students will be able to recruit and manage multi-disciplinary teams to deliver impactful results. Students will learn how to plan new ventures under conditions of extreme uncertainty. Students will have written and pitched at least one individual business plan based on having implemented agile lean techniques (design thinking, lean start-up, disciplined entrepreneurship, and business model canvas) to produce a viable new venture opportunity.
• ENT Goal 4: Information Literacy – Identifying, selecting, storing and processing information from a variety of sources and media; developing successful information seeking and retrieval strategies; and, presenting and communicating information clearly, logically, concisely and accurately.
• ENT Goal 5: Adaptability – Learning from iteration, experimentation, lean methodologies, rapid prototyping of minimum viable products, and dealing with ambiguity and uncertainty, design thinking, customer development, and developing resiliency and grit.
• TRSM Goal 1: Communication – Expressing ideas and information effectively and accurately using a range of media commonly used in business environments.
• TRSM Goal 4: Group and Individual Dynamics – Effectively self-managing and performing effectively within teams.
TEACHING METHODS:
This is an experiential learning course using project-based, student-centric learning pedagogies. The emphasis is on getting out of the classroom setting and building your entrepreneurial skills OUT IN THE REAL WORLD.
The in-class portion of this course is primarily dedicated to studio time where you will have time to work in groups and receive both individual and team-based peer feedback and faculty coaching. You are expected to proactively read the required textbooks as a minimum, and to go beyond the suggested resources to find additional relevant resources on your own. Class attendance and active participation is essential; if you do not intend to participate fully, do not take this course.
A D2L forum will be established for sharing questions and ideas outside of regular class times. You are encouraged to make use of it.
COURSE VALUES
These five principles should guide you during this course (and which are the basis for grades):
1) Be proactive (e.g., get out of the building, meet people, discover and create opportunities),
2) Make something (e.g., brochures, websites, prototypes, MVPs, documentation),
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 4 of 15
3) Build connections (e.g., engage in the entrepreneurial ecosystem, find advisors/coaches, funding, resources, suppliers),
4) Be professional (e.g., live up to your commitments, appointments, ensure high standards),
5) Leverage knowledge (e.g., use the course concepts, tools, resources from outside the course).
EVALUATION:
You will receive the results of your first assignment work by Week 9. There is no final exam in this course. Grades will be posted securely on D2L. It is your responsibility to check your own grades. Students who wish to be informed of their grades by an alternative method must obtain the agreement of their instructor by the start of Week 3.
TURNITIN
Turnitin.com is an originality detection and plagiarism prevention service to which TMU subscribes. It is a tool to assist instructors in determining the similarity between students’ work and the work of other students who have submitted papers to the site (at any university), internet sources, and a wide range of books, journals and other publications. While it does not contain all possible sources, it gives instructors some assurance that students’ work is their own. No decisions are made by the service; it generates an “originality report,” which instructors must evaluate to judge if something is original/plagiarized.
Students agree by taking this course that their written work will be subject to submission for textual similarity review to Turnitin.com. Instructors can opt to have student’s papers included in the Turnitin.com database or not. Use of the Turnitin.com service is subject to the terms-of-use agreement posted on the Turnitin.com website. Students who do not want their work submitted to this plagiarism detection service must, by the end of the second week of class, consult with their instructor to make alternate arrangements.
Even when an instructor has not indicated that a plagiarism detection service will be used, or when a student has opted out of the plagiarism detection service, if the instructor has reason to suspect that an individual piece of work has been plagiarized, the instructor is permitted to submit that work in a non-identifying way to any plagiarism detection service.
TECHNOLOGY USAGE & RULES:
You may not make recordings in the classroom or use the materials posted on D2L for any purpose unrelated to this course without written permission of the instructor.
EMAIL POLICY:
In accordance with the Policy on Ryerson Student E-mail Accounts (Policy 157), Toronto Metropolitan University (TMU) requires that any electronic communication by students to TMU faculty or staff be sent from their official university email account. The instructor will not respond to non-Ryerson emails.
ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING
Refer to the detailed descriptions of assignments and grading rubrics provided on D2L.
Group Deliverables – 30%
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 5 of 15
These assignments are related to your group efforts to tackle your chosen design challenge, using the process and tools taught in the course.
• Fall interim DT report – 15%
• Winter final DT report –15%
Individual Deliverables – 70%
These assignments are related to your individual efforts to master the course material and apply them to an opportunity you have identified and chosen for yourself.
• Alertness plan – 15%
• Portfolio – 15%
• Opportunity development – 10%
• Final individual report – 20%
• Individual group assessment (1 per semester, 5% each) – 10%
COURSE TEXTS
Required:
• Osterwalder, A., et al. (2014) Value Proposition Design: how to create products and services customers want, Wiley. (ISBN: 978-1118968055)
Optional:
• Liedtka, J. and Ogilvie T. (2011) Designing for growth: a design thinking tool kit for managers. Columbia Business School.
• Maurya, A. (2022). Running lean (3rd edition): iterate from Plan A to a plan that works. O'Reilly Media. (ISBN: 978-1098108779)
• Osterwalder, A. and Pigneur, Y. (2010) Business model generation: a handbook for visionaries, game changers, and challengers, Wiley.
• Aulet, Bill (2013) Disciplined entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup, MIT Press or Wiley.
• Kawasaki, G. (2004) Art of the start: the time-tested, battle-hardened guide for anyone starting anything, Portfolio.
ADDITIONAL COMMENTS:
• You should read this document carefully for deadlines and course requirements so that you can be successful in this course. When you have fully read this syllabus please email your instructor a picture of any famous musician. Really. We’re keeping track of who is on the ball or not.
• Professional behaviour appropriate to your status as senior students is expected during class. You are expected to join class on-time and attend all class sessions.
• Missing four (4) or more classes during the two semesters of this course, without permission, will result in failure of the course.
• Professional communication is also expected. Poorly written emails may be ignored, and poorly written assignments may receive a grade of zero.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 6 of 15
• Assignments are due before the start of class on the dates specified, without exception. Late work may not be accepted at all (assigned a grade of zero). If you are unable to submit on the due date, arrange for an early submission. Any absence from class does not excuse you from assignment deadlines.
• Be sure to keep an extra copy of all assignments that you hand in.
• It is your responsibility to clarify any ambiguities that you may find in the course materials or syllabus; when in doubt, ask.
POLICIES AND COURSE PRACTICES
Standards for In-Class Zoom Meetings and Other Virtual Activities
• Students must first log into the D2L course shell using their Ryerson Matrix email ID and then join the Zoom meeting by clicking on the correct link on D2L (this should prevent Zoom Bombing by outsiders).
• Use of your video camera is the expected norm in this class. You should have a good reason if you are not using your camera during class sessions. If you have a valid reason and are unable to do so, then the MINIMUM expectation is that you display a professional head shot of yourself as well as your name (these features are accessible from within the Zoom settings). Anyone not conforming to these requirements will be placed in the waiting room until they comply with them.
• Your instructor may record parts of some sessions. You will be notified on Zoom if the session is recorded.
• Mute your microphone until it is your turn to speak.
• When you are speaking, please turn your video on when possible and appropriate.
• For any side conversations please use the Chat feature. Don’t assume that the professor is able to track these conversations so be prepared to raise your hand using the correct button within Zoom.
• If you need to gain the attention of the professor beyond raising your hand, please unmute your microphone and say “Question Please”.
• Do not annotate others unless requested to do so.
• Follow professional conduct and be polite.
• Do not share the Zoom link with others.
• Students are not permitted to record any part of a Zoom or other virtual activity session with their professor, whether as part of a lecture or an informal meeting.
STANDARD FOR WRITTEN WORK
• Students are expected to use an acceptable standard of business communication for all assignments, in-class discussions, and communication with the site companies and professors. This includes all email communication. Poor grammar, unprofessional and/or unacceptable standard of business communication may result in a grade of zero for that assignment. However, any student who provides a prior draft corrected by Ryerson Writing Support will not be penalized.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 7 of 15
• You are encouraged to obtain assistance from Writing Support (
https://www.ryerson.ca/studentlearningsupport/writing-support/) for help with your written communications as needed. (See the Ryerson Library for APA style guide references: http://www.ryerson.ca/library/ref/style.html). Sloppy, poorly written, or unprofessional documents or communication may be returned with a grade of zero, no grade or unread. Please be sure to use Writing Support (and/or use Grammarly) if you need it!
PROFESSIONALISM
Your participation in the all components of this course reflects on the professionalism and reputation of you, your group members, this course and program, and Toronto Metropolitan University. Accordingly, you are expected to conduct yourself in a professional and courteous manner at all times. For the purposes of this course, unprofessional behavior includes, but is not limited to, any of:
• Missing student and instructor meetings without giving reasonable notice and reason.
• Not participating fully in group activities in class and for assignments, which may be measured by peer evaluations or group reports submitted to instructors.
• Toronto Metropolitan University policies provide accommodation for a variety of circumstances, and seek to avoid bias of several kinds. You are expected to adhere to these policies in your group work and in interactions with students and professors. It is your responsibility to understand these policies, including religious accommodation, academic accommodation, and what constitutes bias for equity-deserving groups.
COURSE MANAGEMENT
• Every effort will be made to manage the course as stated. However, adjustments may be necessary during the term at the discretion of the instructor. If so, students will be advised, and alterations will be discussed prior to implementation, in class and through an announcement on D2L.
• Students are encouraged to review the Ryerson Senate Course Management Policy which provides a framework of common understanding for students, faculty and staff concerning the structures, processes, objectives, and requirements that pertain to Ryerson undergraduate courses. For more detailed information refer to Policy #166: Course Management Policy at www.ryerson.ca/senate/policies/.
• All communication about the course or material related to the course will be posted on the D2L course site. In addition, all student study resources can be accessed through D2L. Students are expected to check the site regularly for updates.
ACADEMIC CONSIDERATION
• All assignments must be submitted to turnitin.com using the Assignment Drop Box on D2L. The assignment Due Dates are identified in the course outline and as advised in D2L. A late submission (we allow a one hour grace period) will be penalized 10 percentage points per day (e.g. 77% becomes a 67% in the first 24 hours, then becomes 57% in the next 24 hours… till the mark becomes a 0%). There will be no penalty for work missed for a JUSTIFIABLE REASON approved by the instructor.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 8 of 15
• Assignments submitted for grading will be handed back within two weeks except for the final exam.
• There will be no penalty for work missed for a justifiable reason. Students need to inform the instructor of any situation that arises during the semester that may have an adverse effect on their academic performance, and request any necessary considerations according to the policies and well in advance. Failure to do so will jeopardize any academic appeals.
• Except in cases of accommodations for disabilities, where documentation is handled directly by Academic Accommodation Support, students must fill out an Academic Consideration form and submit it to their own program office:
• http://www.ryerson.ca/content/dam/senate/forms/academic_consideration_document_submission.pdf
• In addition, the following procedures must be followed:
o Medical certificates – If a student is going to miss a deadline for an assignment, a test or an examination because of illness, he/she must submit a medical certificate (see www.ryerson.ca/senate/forms/medical.pdf for the certificate) to their program office within 3 working days of the missed assignment deadline, test or examination. The program office will notify the instructor that the documents have been received. It is the student’s responsibility to make arrangements with instructor for a make-up exam.
 Policy 167: Academic Consideration for Fall 2020/Winter 2021/Fall 2021/Winter 2022 due to COVID-19: Students who miss an assessment due to cold or flu-like symptoms, or due to self-isolation, are currently not required to provide a health certificate. Other absences must follow Senate Policy 167: Academic Consideration.
 Also NOTE: Outside of COVID-19 symptoms, the new Policy 167: Academic Consideration does allow for a once per term academic consideration request without supporting documentation if the absence is less than 3 days in duration and is not for a final exam/final assessment. In the absence is more than 3 days in duration and/or is for a final exam/final assessment, documentation is required. For more information please see Senate Policy 167: Academic Consideration.
 Ryerson COVID-19 Information and Updates for Students summarizes the variety of resources available to students during the pandemic.
o Ryerson COVID-19 Vaccination PolicyReligious observance – While it is strongly encouraged that students make requests within the first two weeks of class, requests for accommodation of specific religious or spiritual observance must be presented to their program office no later than two weeks prior to the conflict in question (in the case of final examinations, within two weeks of the release of the examination schedule). The student must submit a Request for Accommodation form (http://www.ryerson.ca/senate/forms/relobservforminstr.pdf) to their program office. The office will notify the instructor when they have received the request form.
o Other requests for Academic Consideration which are not related to medical or religious observation must be submitted in writing together with the Academic Consideration form to the student’s program office. The letter must clearly state the reasons for the request and describe the events or circumstances that seriously impair the student’s ability to meet their academic obligations, and that were beyond the student’s control. When possible, supporting
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 9 of 15
documentation must be attached to the letter. The office will notify the instructor when they have received the request. o
Students with disabilities - Ryerson University acknowledges that students have diverse learning styles and a variety of academic needs. If you have a diagnosed disability that impacts your academic experience, connect with Academic Accommodation Support (AAS). Visit the AAS website or contact aasadmin@ryerson.ca for more information. Note: All communication with AAS is voluntary and confidential, and will not appear on your transcript. Before the first graded work is due, students should also inform their instructor through an “Accommodation Form for Professors” that they are registered with AAS and what accommodations are required.
o Regrading or recalculation – These requests must be made to the instructor within 10 working days of the return of the graded assignment to the class. These are not grounds for appeal, but are matters for discussion between the student and the instructor.
• Submission of the Academic Consideration form and all supporting documentation to your program office does not relieve you of the responsibility to NOTIFY YOUR INSTRUCTOR of the problem as soon as it arises, and to contact with the instructor again after the documents have been submitted in order to make the appropriate arrangements.
• If you do not have a justifiable reason for an absence and/or have not followed the procedure described above, you will not be given credit or marks for the work missed during that absence.
For more detailed information on these issues, please refer to Senate Policy 167 (Academic Consideration) and Senate Policy 150 (Accommodation of Student Religious Observance Obligations). Both can be found at www.ryerson.ca/senate/policies/.
At Ryerson, we recognize that things can come up throughout the term that may interfere with a student’s ability to succeed in their coursework. These circumstances are outside of one’s control and can have a serious impact on physical and mental well-being. Seeking help can be a challenge, especially in those times of crisis. Below are resources we encourage all Ryerson community members to access to ensure support is reachable.
https://www.ryerson.ca/mental-health-wellbeing If support is needed immediately, you can access these outside resources at anytime:
Distress Line — 24/7 line for if you are in crisis, feeling suicidal or in need of emotional support (phone: 416–408–4357)
Good2Talk- 24/7 hour line for postsecondary students (phone: 1-866-925-5454)
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
• Plagiarism is a serious academic offence and penalties range from zero in an assignment to expulsion from the University. Plagiarism is defined in the Student Code of Academic Conduct as claiming the words, ideas, artistry, drawings, images or data of another person as if they were your own. Also, knowingly assisting someone to commit any form of academic misconduct is itself academic misconduct.
• It is assumed that all examinations and work submitted for evaluation and course credit will be the product of individual effort, except in the case of team projects arranged for and approved by
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 10 of 15
the course instructor. Submitting the same work to more than one course, without instructors’ approval, is also considered plagiarism. • Students are strongly encouraged to visit the Academic Integrity Website at
www.ryerson.ca/academicintegrity for more detail and to refer to Policy #60: Student Code of Academic Conduct at www.ryerson.ca/senate/policies/ .
MAINTAINING A PROFESSIONAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
• See Policy #61: Student Code of Non-Academic Conduct at www.ryerson.ca/senate/policies/
EXAMINATIONS
• All students must display a valid and relevant student photo-identification card during the course of an examination. Students are expected to refrain from bringing cellular phones, personal audio equipment, and other electronic devices into the examination room unless specifically permitted by the course instructor. Students are also not permitted to wear hats or to have food during the exam unless medically required (you may bring water into the exam room provided it is in a transparent plastic bottle without labels).
• For more detailed information on examination policies, refer to Pol#135: Examination Policy at www.ryerson.ca/senate/policies/.
ACADEMIC GRADING POLICY
Evaluation of student performance will follow the established academic grading policy outlined in Policy #46: Policy on Undergraduate Grading, Promotion, and Academic Standing (the “the GPA Policy”) at www.ryerson.ca/senate/policies/. The grading system is summarized below:
Definition
Letter Grade
Grade Point
Percentage Range
Excellent
A+
4.33
90-100
A
4.00
85-89
A-
3.67
80-84
Good
B+
3.33
77-79
B
3.00
73-76
B-
2.67
70-72
Satisfactory
C+
2.33
67-69
C
2.00
63-66
C-
1.67
60-62
Marginal
D+
1.33
57-59
D
1.00
53-56
D-
0.67
50-52
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 11 of 15
Unsatisfactory
F
0.00
0-49
Department of Entrepreneurship & Strategy
ENT 56 (1st Semester) Class Schedule Fall 2022 – Mondays 10 AM
All Readings are to be done PRIOR to the class indicated
Wk
Date
Topic
Readings
Deadlines
1
Sept 12
Introduction.
DT challenge topic.
D2L Intros. Course outline. http://public.tepper.cmu.edu/ethics/AA/mgmt13-case.pdf
2
Sept 19
DT challenge pitches.
Effectuation.
VPD (p. vi - 25).
Effectuation 3-pager.
3
Sept 26
Confirm DT challenges.
Overview of the DT process.
VPD (p. 26 - 73).
4
Oct 3
Research methods.
VPD (p. 74 - 103).
Alertness plan.
Oct 10
Reading Week
5
Oct 17
Zone introductions.
Understanding customers.
VPD (p. 104 - 141).
6
Oct 24
MANDATORY Group coaching sessions.
7
Oct 31
The problem diamond.
VPD (p. 142 - 157).
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 13 of 15
8
Nov 7
Refine the challenge.
VPD (p. 188 - 213).
9
Nov 14
The solution diamond.
Spirit of DT.
Brainstorming solutions.
VPD (p. 214 - 237).
10
Nov 21
Prototypes.
Assumptions testing.
Shopify intro.
VPD (p. 238 - 272)
Portfolio.
11
Nov 28
MANDATORY Group coaching sessions.
12
Dec 5
Customer acquisition.
Interim DT report.
Individual group assessment.
ENT 56 (Second Semester) Class PRELIMINARY Class Schedule Winter 2023 – Mondays 10 AM
Wk
Date
Topic
Deadlines
13
Feedback.
Group prototypes.
Plenary OD.
14
Assumption testing.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 14 of 15
15
OD Solution demo A
16
MANDATORY Group coaching sessions.
17
Test result interpretation
Opportunity development
18
Studio Time – Class optional
19
MANDATORY Group coaching session.
20
Guest Speaker - TBD
21
Studio Time – Class optional
22
Studio Time – Class optional
23
Course Wrap Up. ENT 78 Preview with Charlene Nichols-Nixon
24
FDT presentations
Interim DT report.
Individual group assessment.
ENT 56 Course Outline – Poulos Page 15 of 15