ETRO 497 { Capstone Project I { Fall 2017
Syllabus: Capstone Project I
Je rey Yepez
University of Hawai`i Maui College
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Department
310 Ka`ahumanu Ave, Kahului, HI 96732-1617
yepez@hawaii.edu
(Dated: September 1, 2017)
I. COURSE DESCRIPTION
This is a 3 credit one-semester course on research and development.
A. Overview
The course teaches the research and development (R&D) cycle, beginning with the conceptual planning and review
phases of an engineering project. The students practice project documentation, formal design review presentations,
oral defense of the project, and writing a  nal report. The course introduces technical methods for analyzing,
designing, prototyping, synthesizing, troubleshooting, and testing an integrated system (comprising multiple devices
and subsystems) to create a scienti c experimental device.
The class meets Fridays from 9:00-11:45am (via VTC as needed)
O ce Hours: Friday after class and by appointment
Prerequisites: ETRO 315 with grade C, or better. | This prerequisite cannot be waived.
B. Course plan
The course guides the students to build a rocket payload under the NASA RockSat-C program. The RockSat-C
program o ers an opportunity for the students to build an experimental system payload (within a 9.5" high and 9.3"
diameter cylindrical canister) that is launched in a sounding rocket at the NASA Wallops Flight Facility reaching a
low Earth orbit altitude ( 110km) in space.
The microgravity environment in NASA Cold Atom Laboratory to be installed in the International Space Station
allows for exploring the behavior a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) in an optical lattice. In this course, a nonlinear
optics experiment will be developed (for example laser-stabilization via novel digital PID controllers) that is useful
for applications to in-space experiments that require lasers.
This course, the  rst semester of a year long course, teaches the students using a hands-on and team-oriented approach.
The course focuses on the concept development portion of the R&D acquisition cycle that begins with Concept
Design Review (CoDR), Preliminary Design Review (PDR) through Critical Design Review (CDR). The students will
participate by helping to plan an innovative experiment, including the preparation of a detailed budget of estimated
costs for the experiment's subsystems and components as well as an enumerated supply and equipment list for
subsequent purchase acquisition of the required subsystem components. Furthermore, the student will participate by
developing a timeline and schedule of critical milestones for assembling the payload in the Spring semester|assuming
the project is accepted in January 2017 by NASA|for participation in upcoming RockSat-C launch in the summer
of 2018.
2
C. Course philosophy
The overall objective of this course is to give students a simulated design experience that is as close to real life as is
practicable in a university setting. Thus, the course involves:
1. Learning how an engineering project works, including its systems, its standards, and its practices.
2. Designing a fairly comprehensive project requiring interfacing of several subsystems.
3. Working as an integral member of a design team, typically a few people (and not greater than a half dozen).
4. De ning the scope of the project, planning and scheduling the collaborative e orts of the team, and documenting
the e ort via oral and written proposals, design notebooks, design reviews, progress reports and oral and written
design reports, including engineering drawings and a poster presentation.
5. Levering and building upon previous experiences and skills of all the team members to accomplish the new
design task.
D. Skill set
This course represents the culmination of the engineering and technology program at UH Maui College. The
expected proposed UHMC experiment payload for RockSat-C will involve an encapsulated nonlinear optics experiment
that draws together the students engineering skills acquired in several prerequisite courses, including Optics, Signals
and Systems, Optoelectronics, Digital Signal Processing, Remote Sensing and Control Systems.
II. PROSPECTUS
A. Course activities
This course gives the junior student preparing for graduation an insight into and  rst experience of the engineering
environment in a real scienti c and engineering design project. The textbook covers teamwork, project management,
planning, scheduling, engineering paperwork, etc. Guest lecturers may cover specialty areas such as intellectual
property, personnel issues, job opportunities in the engineering  eld, and the like.
Activities include learning teamwork skills, project management skills, maintaining a design notebook, preparing
a proposal to do the work needed to provide a design speci cation, a construction, installation, or manufacturing
schedule, and a equipment cost estimate.
The proposal will include:
  a literature review of the state of the art
  a description of what the sponsoring agency wants
  a timeline of activities to accomplish the project
  a detailed action item list for the  rst two weeks of the design period
  an organizational chart
  resumes of all the candidate investigators
  an estimated cost for all components required for building a working model.
Teams will deliver their proposals in written and oral format as well as electronically; that is each team will post
their written proposal provided in PDF document, their slide presentation, and their end-of-proposal memo on their
teams web space.
Activities in the proposals include:
3
  doing the design work as speci ed in the proposal
  maintaining individual design notebooks
  using project management tools to control the progress of the project
  producing weekly status reports in the form of an action item list
  conducting one to three design reviews
  producing written and electronically delivered progress reports, and producing oral, poster, and written design
reports, including engineering drawings and a working model, if appropriate
  posting in their web space the action item list, design review handouts, progress report documents, written
design report, slide-based design presentation, a copy of their poster as a PDF  le, and the end-of-project
memo.
Projects may be proposed by faculty who would like to be project technical advisors, the course instructors, local
industry, or non-pro t groups, or student groups.
Criteria for project selection include:
  a work scope suitable for a team of few to a half-dozen students
  feasibility in terms of di culty and complexity within the time constraint of a design period of 11 to 12 weeks
  the mix of personnel required must match the personnel available in the class, and
  suitability of the project for todays world.
Attendance is mandatory for all classes and absenteeism adversely a ects your grade unless your absence is excused
by an instructor. To obtain an excused absence, simply email to your professor your name, team number, dates of
absence and valid reason(s) for absence. For scheduled events like job interviews, an email is expected ahead of the
absence. For unscheduled events like illnesses, an email immediately after the absence is expected.
Each individual student is required to keep a project design notebook covering his/her own design e ort. These are
to be available for review at any class or team meeting by the faculty project technical advisor or course instructor.
Progress will be reviewed weekly in a meeting with the faculty project technical advisor. Design notebooks are bound
and have sequential page numbers. In the event of a debate over grade assignments, the design notebooks will be
used to determine the quantity, quality and timeliness of the work in question.
Late work is not accepted. You may receive a grade of Incomplete or Failure for the second phase (ETRO 498)
unless you submit ALL of the following:
  Any borrowed items (parts, tools, equipment, etc.)
  Any items borrowed from the instructor, faculty technical advisor, faculty or sta  member, or any other person
on or o  campus
  Items purchased by the department have been returned to the person who paid for them
  Your personal design notebook: duplicate pages, original, or photocopy
  Teamwork Evaluation Form and Course Assessment Form has been submitted
  Your team has submitted all the required documents and items.
B. Project Teams
The students, with the instructors guidance, form into teams. The instructor attempts to provide each team with
members having the variety of interests and training needed for the project design.
4
C. Project Documents
At the end of ETRO 497 each team presents a written and an oral proposal to the instructor and faculty or sta 
member. This proposal outlines the relevant literature, describes the design, and de nes the work to be done on the
project in the second phase, ETRO 498, and the deliverables to be submitted at the completion of the project. It
also contains a list of resources that will be needed and a schedule for accomplishing this work.
The team will also submit an End-of-Proposal memo. This memo will include:
  a project management assessment report that tells what tools were used to manage the project to keep it on
schedule and under budget, including any changes they made during the management process as the project
proceeded 
  recommendations to engineers undertaking proposals of this type in the future 
  a list of the things that each of the team members had to learn that was not taught in any class s/he had taken 
  if the project will include a working model, a copy of the Resources Needed section from the proposal
  the complete project action item list with all items un-hidden
  the initial timeline with as-bid blocks clearly identi ed and space for the as-worked blocks
  from each individual, a time log for the proposal preparation phase that shows: Date, Hours worked, and total
hours worked
  copies of all the team meeting agendas during the work period since the proposal acceptance. Do not re-type,
if they are handwritten or the electronic copy has been deleted, just scan them in from the one you used,
handwritten meeting notes on it are okay.
 The only three documents that are not copied from other reports or paperwork.
Each week during both the  rst (ETRO497) and second (ETRO498) phase, each team presents its status to manage-
ment in the form of its action item list for the past week and the next two weeks, meetings and/or oral reports.
Two to four weeks into the second phase, each team will schedule a design review. These are formal presentations to
outside experts, faculty, and undergraduate students. Formal dress is NOT required; just wear whatever you normally
wear to work (school). Emphasis is on content. The team chooses attendees that are willing and able to provide
helpful direction to the design work as part of a technical review.
At the end of the second phase, ETRO 498, the team submits the design report on their assigned design project.
This report has sections which pertain to the project as a whole: executive summary, introduction, literature review,
project description including a block diagram or plot plan, capital cost and schedule to implement the designed
project. It also has a section prepared by each team member covering his/her design e orts and backing up the team
conclusions presented in the  rst part of the report. The team makes a formal oral presentation in which each team
member is expected to speak for approximately the same amount of time. The team also presents the design as a
poster presentation that gives the problem statement, describes each subsystem of the recommended solution, and
presents the total capital cost and time required to implement the design presented in the  nal design report.
D. Project Schedule
Week Milestone Due date
3rd Week Project Menu/Title (September 8, 2017)
5th Week Requests for Proposals (RFP) out (September 22, 2017)
13th Week Proposals due (November 17, 2017)
15th & 16th Weeks Oral Proposal Presentations (December 1 & 8, 2017)
16th Week, Friday by 3pm Final Proposal Submission due (December 8, 2017)
17th Week Order specialized parts
5
Project
Menu
RFPs
out
Proposals
due
Oral Proposal
Presentations
Bound
Proposals
due
Order
Specialized
Parts
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 weeks
UH Policy on e-mail communication
The electronic communications policy adopted in December 2005 establishes the University of Hawai'i
Internet service as an official medium for communication among students, faculty, and staff. Every
member of the system has a hawaii.edu address, and the associated username and password provide
access to essential Web announcements and e-mail. You are hereby informed of the need to log
regularly in to UH e-mail and Web services for announcements and personal mail. Failing to do so will
mean missing critical information from academic and program advisors, instructors, registration, and
business office staff, classmates, student organizations, and others.
HOMEWORK:
Homework will be assigned after every chapter and Homework test will be given covered assigned
homework problems. There is no credit given for ONLY an answer. To receive full credit, you must
show your work in a neat and ordinary fashion and do all the assigned problems.
LATE POLICY:
No late submission will be accepted..
ATTENDANCE:
Regular attendance to the lecture is strongly advised. You will be responsible for all the material
presented in class, regardless of whether or not you were present. If you are habitually absent from class
you will not be allowed to take the examinations.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
We encourage full group and class collaboration on most aspects of this course: in-class work, lab
experiments and reports, projects or research. However, individual assignments, such as homework, are
to done individually, in the own words of the student. Non-original work will be disqualified.
DECORUM:
Your classroom behavior must not disrupt the learning experience of the other students. In particular: no
eating, no drinking, no reading of newspapers or magazines, no “private conversations, no beeping
pages, no rings cell phones.
SUGGESTIONS:
FIG. 1 Weekly schedule for Capstone Project I ETRO 497.
III. COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND EVALUATION
Each student's grade in the course depends in part on the evaluation of his/her performance of assigned individual
tasks, but primarily on the evaluation of the teams overall accomplishment.
Any member of the UH Maui College Engineering Technology faculty or sta  or participating parties outside the
college may witness and review both written and oral reports. However, the course evaluation will be done by the
course instructor and the faculty technical advisor.
A. Grading
The grading range for the course is A through F, with weighting as follows:
Academic measurements Weight
Written Progress/Final Report 40%
Presenatation I Pre-proposal 15%
Class Activities /Homework 25%
Presentation II Project proposal 20%
100%
IV. METHOD OF INSTRUCTION
  Class discussions and experiment preparation
  Internet-based video teleconference as needed
  Weekly o ce hours on Friday at 12pm or otherwise scheduled by e-mail request
V. WIKIPEDIA
Project management material related to Capstone Project I:
  Project managment
  Cost engineering
6
  Project management software
  Small-scale project management
Engineering and technology related material for Capstone Project I in the Fall 2017 semester:
  Printed circuit board
  Field-programmable gate array
  PID controller
  Nonlinear optics
  Spontaneous parametric down-conversion
  Ultracold atom
  Cold Atom Laboratory
VI. RESOURCES
  Reference text book:
Robert B. Angus, Norman R. Gundersen, Thomas P. Cullinane, \Planning, Performing and Controlling
Projects", 3/E, Prentice Hall, 2003, ISBN-10: 0130416703.
  Additional resources and weekly updates will be provided in class.
7
VII. DISABILITY STATEMENT
1. If you have a disability and have not voluntarily disclosed the nature of your disability and the support you
need, you are invited to contact Lisa Deneen - Disabilities Coordinator at 984-3227 or Telecommunication Device
for the Deaf (TDD) 984-3325 or the Text Telephone (TT) replay service at 643-8833.
2. Reasonable accommodations will be provided for students with documented physical, sensory, systemic, cogni-
tive, learning and psychiatric disabilities. If you believe you have a disability requiring accommodations, please
notify Lisa Deneen - Disabilities Coordinator at 984-3227 or Telecommunication Device for the Deaf (TDD)
984-3325 or the Text Telephone (TT) replay service at 643-8833. The Disabilities Coordinator will verify your
disability and provide the course instructor with recommendations for appropriate accommodations.