Course Outline
Course Code
RSM 260 H1F
Course Name
Organizational Behaviour
Term, Year
Summer, 2024
Course Meets
LEC101 Tues and Thurs 1-3pm
Web page URL
https://q.utoronto.ca
Instructor Details
Name
Email
Office Hours
Virtual Office Link
Chloe Kovacheff
chloe.kovacheff@rotman.utoronto.ca
By appointment
Zoom
Course Scope, Mission and Learning Outcomes
This course is designed to provide you with an in-depth introduction to the field of organizational behaviour. Organizational behaviour is the study of how individuals and groups impact behaviour within an organization. The goal of this course is for you to become familiar with organizational behaviour research and theory, and to be able to think critically about organizations and their effectiveness.
As future employees and managers, you will encounter a broad range of workplace issues involving individuals, groups, and the organization as a whole. Successfully navigating each of these challenges will require a keen understanding of individual psychology, group and team dynamics, and organizational structure. And you will need to be aware of how these areas fit into your working life. Therefore, to get the most out of this course, you are encouraged to think of yourself not as a student, but as a “manager in training.” Key topics will include understanding individual differences, motivating and leading employees, working in effective groups, ethics and negotiations, among others.
Since your organizational experience is somewhat limited at this stage, we will do our best to create activities that help you apply your learning to the real world. Our goal is that you learn as much as possible about organizational behaviour that you can actually use in your own life.
Course Prerequisites
Prerequisite: Completion of the Rotman Commerce Guaranteed Admission requirements. Exclusion: IRE260H1, PSY332H1, WDW260H1
Course Materials
Required Readings
Colquitt, J., LePine, J. A., Wesson, M. J., & Gellatly, I. R. Organizational Behavior: Improving Performance and Commitment in the Workplace (8th edition). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
2
This is the best textbook for an introductory organizational behaviour course. Designed more for a two-term course instead of one, you will be reading selected chapters. This text is available in print or online. This text is available through the University of Toronto Bookstore – see the link in the Modules section of Quercus for your course to purchase the e-book or hard copy of the textbook.
Evaluation and Grades
Grades are a measure of the knowledge and skills developed by a student within individual courses. Each student will receive a grade on the basis of how well they have command of the course materials, skills and learning objectives of the course.
Work
Percentage of grade
Due Date
Attendance & Participation
5%
Ongoing
Reaction assignments
5%
Ongoing
Midterm assessment
25%
Thursday, May 23rd, 1-3pm
Research credit
3%
Credits must be completed by June 13th at 5pm
Group project
22%
Uploaded to Quercus by June 9th at the latest
Final exam
40%
TBA
Attendance & Participation
Attendance and participation in class discussions are key to learning RSM 260. Conflicts arise (e.g., travel, interviews, or illness), so you will not have to attend every class in-person order to receive full participation marks. In fact, you will be allowed to miss up to 2 classes and still earn full participation credit. (Note: it is not necessary to receive permission to miss class or alert the instructor if you plan to miss class). Although being present is central to earning full marks, mere attendance at every class does not guarantee a perfect participation grade. Attendance will be recorded as will discussion participation—especially “high-quality” contributions that engage learning and dialogue. Final “Attendance and Participation” grades will be subjectively determined by your instructor.
Reaction Assignments
For most classes, you will be expected to turn in a short reaction paper in response to that week’s assignment (regardless of whether you plan to attend that class in-person). You will receive a pass/fail grade on each assignment. Unless otherwise specified, to get a passing grade, you should write about 2-3 paragraphs explaining (a) what you found interesting, surprising, or confusing, and (b) how what you’ve learned relates to your own life both in terms of experiences you have already had and in terms of experiences you could potentially have in the future.
In total, reaction papers will be worth 5% of your grade. We highly encourage you to complete all reaction paper assignments. They are designed to help you prepare for class, enhance your learning, and assist you in working on your critical thinking and writing skills. You will need to electronically submit each reaction paper on Quercus before class starts.
3
Group Project
The topics and theories we cover in class pertain to real-world organizational issues. This assignment is intended to enhance your knowledge of how organizational behaviour can apply to the real issues that organizations and employees are facing, while improving your ability to work in a team while being innovative and creative.
You will be assigned (by the instructor) to a group with approximately five other students in your section, depending on class size.
Together, you will locate and analyze a news article in a mainstream, North American newspaper or magazine that relates to a theory or topic we discuss in class (that is, directly relates to an issue within an organization, or by a manager or employee of an organization). NOTE: you should not pick a summary type article that already applies organizational behaviour theories to the phenomenon (topic from the news) that you are interested in discussing (i.e., Harvard Business Review article, etc). Your group will create either a podcast or informative video that presents a listener/viewer with the important facts pertaining to the real-world, organizational event. As “experts” in OB, you will also provide commentary and analysis that explains to the audience how some particular organizational concepts or theories that we discuss in class helps explain what happened, why it happened, and what the organization could have done to improve upon the situation (or if they did something right, why they got it right).
To help make sure your group is on the right track and to help with logistics, we will try to devote some class time to teams working together on their group projects. During this time, you are highly encouraged to ask questions of your instructor about your topic and plans.
Finished Product Details:
The finished product should be between 10-15 minutes.
To bring the podcast/video to life, you can have people act out roles (as if they were part of the event being explored. For example, you can “interview” an “employee” working at the focal organization). If you do this, please make sure you make it clear to the audience somewhere that it is an “actor portrayal” so there is no misunderstanding.
Your project grade will be based on the analysis you provide (a rubric is provided below).
Although you’re encouraged to be creative the finished product must:
1. Summarize the article. For example:
■ What is the issue the organization, manager or employee is facing?
■ Why did the issue come about? What is the brief history of the issue?
■ Why is this good/bad for the employee and/or organization?
2. Answer: What are the OB theories/topics that relate to this issue?
■ Briefly summarize the one to two theories that you will use to help explain the issue. While there may be many related theories, it is best to limit yourself to the most relevant ones to be able to clearly explain and provide enough detail for your grade. Include definitions.
3. Apply the OB theories/topics to the issue
4
■ Clearly explain how the theories/topics apply to the issue. Use examples from the article to make it clear that you understand how the theory/topic applies to this situation. Analyze the situation based on what you know from class.
4. Recommendations and conclusions
■ Based on what you know about OB, what can you recommend to the employee or organization to improve their situation? Or, in the case of a positive example, what can you suggest for other organizations based on what you learned from this situation and your knowledge about OB?
When your group submits the finished product to the instructor, one person from your group will need to provide a copy of the article your group used as the basis of your podcast/video.
Marking rubric (raw scores)
Theory topic accuracy (10)
Choice of topic (good fit for this class, engaging, something to discuss) 5
Choice of O.B. issues (good-fit for phenomena, coherent, comprehensive) 5
Application (10)
Definition of O.B. concepts/theory & supporting evidence 5
Explicit connections between the O.B. theory and the specific topic 5
Recommendations & Analysis (5) 5
Based on what you know about OB, what can you recommend to the employee or organization? Or, in the case of a positive example, what can you suggest for other organizations based on this example?
Presentation Quality (5)
Clarity (sound clarity, editing, etc.) 2
Creativity of “set-up” 3
Research Credit
Marketing and Organizational Behaviour researchers run experimental studies to test theories about human behaviour. The research requirement is intended to supplement this course’s material, by giving you direct exposure to research in these fields. You may fulfill this requirement by:
1. Participation in three hours (credits) of research studies, or
2. Analysis of three research articles, or
3. A combination of research studies and article analyses
Note: this is not an extra credit assignment; credit-hours of participation translate into real percentage values, as determined by the professor (check your syllabus). You will receive one credit for each one-hour of research participation you complete, or per each article analysis you write.
5
USING SONA: PRE-REGISTERED ACCOUNT AND COURSE REGISTRATION
To participate in a research study, you will need to sign into our Rotman Behavioural Research Lab (BRL) research participation website (SONA): https://rotman.sona-systems.com/. Please add both the SONA Admin (rotman-admin@sona-systems.net) and Behavioural Research Lab (Behavioural.Lab@rotman.utoronto.ca) email addresses to your contact list. This will ensure that registration, password reset links, and important updates regarding your account/study participation are not mistakenly marked as spam. Former Participants: those with existing BRL credit-pool accounts on SONA can use their previous credentials to log-in, and immediately begin registering for courses and studies. New Users: your account has already been created for you by our Lab Manager. This account is linked to your “[Username]@mail.utoronto.ca” email address, and a link to complete the registration has been sent to that address. Trouble Logging In: if you have overlooked your password registration link, or forgotten details of your log-in information, please use the “Forgot Password” feature on the SONA log-in page to have these credentials sent to your email. Please familiarize yourself with the “Student Guide,” made available to you by your professor. This guide, as well as the FAQ on SONA, cover all the pertinent steps and criteria for completing your participation requirement through either study participation or article analyses. Email Behavioural.Lab@rotman.utoronto.ca if you have any questions,
Midterm and Final Exam
More information will be provided in class – these will involve multiple choice and short essay questions.
Course Format and Expectations
Writing Assignments or Presentations
Writing assignments such as the reaction assignment, reflections, and group project are intended to help you develop your communication skills. How well you communicate your ideas, in writing or orally, will be considered in the evaluation of the assignment. In your written assignments, you should aim for clarity, strong organization, concision, professionalism, and correct grammar. Your presentations should reflect strong planning and organization, clarity of speech, and an engaging demeanour. Sources, whether in written or presentation assignments, should always be correctly attributed.
Support is available through the RC Centre for Professional Skills (CPS) for students who would like help or feedback on their writing or speaking (presentations). CPS offers both individual and group appointments with trained writing instructors and presentation coaches who are familiar with the RC program and common types of business assignments. You can also access your college Writing Centres for help with written assignments.
You can book an appointment with a writing or presentation coach through the RC Centre for Professional Skills Writing Centre. For more information about writing centres, student supports, and study resources, see the Writing and Presentation Coaching academic support page.
6
Team or Group Assignments
The group project requires students to work in teams of 5-7, which will be assigned by the instructor. Learning to work together in teams is a crucial transferrable skill you will use not only in your coursework, but also in your future careers. Support is available if you encounter common teamwork challenges such as:
• Team members feeling left out of the team.
• Team members not responding in a timely manner to communication.
• Division or quality of work among team members being unequal or unfair.
Consult the Centre for Professional Skills Teamwork Resources page for tips, strategies, and best practices. You can also book an appointment with a teamwork mentor through the RC Centre for Professional Skills Writing Centre. Teamwork mentors can help you resolve or mitigate conflict, strategize on planning, or improve team communication.
If you are a student registered with Accessibility Services, and extensions are one of your academic accommodations, consult with your Accessibility Advisor about the teamwork in this course.
Missed Tests and Assignments
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may request special consideration within 2 business days of the missed midterm/test/assignment due date.
In such cases, students must:
1. Complete the Request for Special Consideration form: https://uoft.me/RSMConsideration
2. Provide documentation to support the request, eg. Absence Declaration from ACORN, medical note etc.
Please note: As of September 2023, students may use the Absence Declaration on ACORN *one time per term* to report an absence and request consideration. Any subsequent absence will require a Verification of Illness form or other similar relevant documentation.
Students who do not submit their requests and documentation within 2 days may receive a grade of 0 (zero) on the missed course deliverable.
If you cannot complete the midterm test because of an excused absence, the value of the midterm test will be transferred to the final exam that will then account for 70% of your final grade.
Final Exams: If you miss the final exam in this course for a legitimate reason (illness, etc) you will need to connect with your College Registrar to file a petition for a deferred exam. This deferred exam will be written at a later date as established by the Faculty of Arts & Science. Instructions can be found here: https://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/current/faculty-registrar/petitions-appeals/preparing-petition
Late Assignments
Reaction assignments will not be given credit if submitted late. If a student is unable to submit a reaction assignment due to reasons beyond their control, the student must notify the instructor
7
by the date and time that the assignment is due for consideration for an exemption; exemptions may be granted on a case-by-case basis.
Late submission of the group project will be penalized by 50% if the assignment is not received on the specified date, at the specified time. A further penalty of 10% will be applied to each subsequent day.
Statement on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or harassment against any persons or communities.
Commitment to Accessibility
The University is committed to inclusivity and accessibility, and strives to provide support for, and facilitate the accommodation of, individuals with disabilities so that all may share the same level of access to opportunities and activities offered at the University.
If you require accommodations for a temporary or ongoing disability or health concern, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please email Accessibility Services or visit the Accessibility Services website for more information as soon as possible. Obtaining your accommodation letter may take up to several weeks, so get in touch with them as soon as possible. If you have general questions or concerns about the accessibility of this course, you are encouraged to reach out to your instructor, course coordinator, or Accessibility Services.
Ouriginal
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University’s plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the University’s use of this tool are described on the University's Plagiarism Detection Tool FAQ page from Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation.
Generative AI / ChatGPT
Students may not use artificial intelligence tools for taking tests or writing reaction assignments. Students may use artificial intelligence tools for creating an outline for an assignment, but the final submitted assignment must be original work produced by the individual student alone. If you have any question about the use of AI applications for course work, please speak with the instructor. Note that whether you choose to use generative AI technologies for assistance in structuring coursework, you remain responsible for the accuracy and clarity of content. While generative AI can be helpful, it's important to remember that it's not always accurate or reliable.
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the U of T degree that you earn will continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously.
8
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments
• Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
• Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
• Making up sources or facts.
• Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed individually).
On test and exams
• Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
• Looking at someone else's answers.
• Misrepresenting your identity.
• Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation
• Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
• Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to) medical notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any question about what is or is not permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other U of T or RC resources such as the RC Centre for Professional Skills, the College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre.
Email
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by email. As such, all U of T students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up and properly entered on ACORN. For more information visit the Information Commons Help Desk.
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Gmail or other type of email account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Gmail accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder.
Recording Lectures
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit permission and may not do so unless permission is granted. Students who have been previously granted permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are
9
excepted. This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus materials, etc.
If permission for recording is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to “publish” them in any way. It is forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a website or sell them in any other form without formal permission.
Weekly Schedule
Session
Date
Topic
Readings and Deliverables
1
May 7th
Introduction to Organizational Behaviour
Chapter 1
2
May 9th
Personality and Values
Intro to Group Projects
Chapter 9 & 4 (4.2 Only)
Reaction Assignment
3
May 14th
Motivation, Satisfaction, and Job Design
Chapter 4 (4.1, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5) & 6
Reaction Assignment
4
May 16th
Leadership and Biases
Chapter 14
Reaction Assignment
5
May 21st
Midterm Review / Make up class
Reaction Assignment
6
May 23rd
MIDTERM: held during class time, location TBA
7
May 28th
Groups and Teams
Chapter 11 & 12
Reaction Assignment
8
May 30th
Power and Ethics
Chapter 7 (Sec 7.5) &
13 (Sec 13.1-13.2)
Reaction Assignment
9
June 4th
Organizational Culture, Communication, and Socialization
Chapter 16
Reaction Assignment
10
June 6th
Strategic Decision-Making
Chapter 8
Reaction Assignment
11
June 11th
Negotiation
Section 13.6
Reaction Assignment
12
June 13th
Wrap-Up and Review / Make up class
FINAL
TBD
Final examination period: June 19th-24th
Please note that the last day you can drop this course without academic penalty is June 3rd, 2024.
Other Useful Links
• Become a volunteer note taker
• Accessibility Services Note Taking Support
• Credit / No-Credit in RSM courses
• Rotman Commerce Academic Support
URL links for print
• Book an appointment with a writing or presentation coach: http://uoft.me/writingcentres
• Writing and Presentation Coaching academic support page: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/academic-support/writing-and-presentation-coaching/
• Centre for Professional Skills Teamwork Resources page: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/teamwork-resources
• Book an appointment with a Teamwork Mentor: http://uoft.me/writingcentres
• Request for Special Consideration Form: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/forms-requests-and-appeals/forms/
• ACORN: http://www.acorn.utoronto.ca/
• Email Accessibility Services: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca
• Accessibility Services website: http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/as
• University's Plagiarism Detection Tool FAQ: https://uoft.me/pdt-faq
• The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm
• Information Commons Help Desk: http://help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html
• Become a volunteer note taker: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/program/volunteer-note-taking/
• Accessibility Services Note Taking Support: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/service/note-taking-support/
• Credit / No-Credit in RSM courses: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/degree-requirements/credit-no-credit-option/
• Rotman Commerce Academic Support: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/academic-support/