Course Outline for RSM362
Leading Across Differences
Fall 2019
Course Meets: Fridays 10:00 – 12:00 AM, WO 35, (119 St. George St.)
Instructor: Nouman Ashraf (he/him/his)
Assistant Professor, Teaching Stream
Organizational Behavior and Human Resources Management Area
Director, Equity, Diversity & Inclusion
Rotman School of Management
Instructor E-Mail: nouman.ashraf@rotman.utoronto.ca
Phone: +1 416.978.6998
Twitter: @s_nouman_ashraf
Office Hours: By appointment, Room 6062, 105 St. George St.
Teaching Assistant: Hadiya Roderique
J.D./M.A, Ph. D Candidate, Rotman School of Management
Email: Hadiya.Roderique12@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca
COURSE SCOPE AND MISSION
There is enormous buzz about twenty first century leadership competencies that reflect the evolving nature of both the corporate culture as well as the disparate expectations of stakeholders at large. One such key leadership competency is the ability to navigate differences within and across the organization effectively. Differences are not simply defined by vectors of identity such as gender, race, culture, religion, sexual orientation, levels of ability, linguistic preference, to name only a few, but equally importantly, by disparate ways of learning, creating new ideas and formulating new worldviews. All of the aforementioned comprise the basis of an integrative approach to knowledge, action and effective leadership.
Through a series of thought provoking and experiential sessions that are focused upon skills enhancement, the course will make linkages between one’s individual leadership stance and tools for leveraging differences for impact. There will also be constant focus upon uncovering innovative frames around diversity and inclusion that can directly impact organizational strategy across sectors. Thought leaders, executives and practitioners from various organizations will bring their unique perspectives and insights to deepen the learning experience.
This course is an invitation to upper year students within the Rotman Commerce learning community to dive into a cohort of learning and practice with a very particular commitment: learning by integrating across disciplines, sectors and approaches. My commitment to everyone enrolled in this course is to make this an experience that is provocative, insightful and engaging.
These are pre-requisites for deep learning to take place. My expectation is that students will not simply attend the sessions, rather that they will actively contribute to creating, enabling and sustaining an integrative learning environment.
COURSE PREREQUISITES
Enrolment is restricted to 3rd and 4th year Rotman Commerce students.
REQUIRED READINGS
‘Why should anyone be led by you?’ by Robert Goffee, Gareth Jones, Harvard business review, (September 2000).
‘The competitive imperative of learning’ by Amy C. Edmondson, Harvard Business Review. (July - Aug 2010).
‘How will you measure your life?’ by Clayton Christensen, Harvard Business Review, (July – August 2010).
‘Design for action’ by Tim Brown and Roger Martin, Harvard Business Review, (September 2015).
‘Navigating the cultural minefield by Erin Meyer, Harvard Business Review (December 2015).
‘The unintended consequences of diversity statements’ by Sonia Kang, Katherine DeCelles, Andras Tilcsik and Sora Jun, Harvard Business Review, (March 2016).
Diversity efforts fall short unless employees feel that they belong by Pat Wadors, Harvard Business Review, (August 2016).
EVALUATION AND GRADES
Grades are a measure of the performance of a student in individual courses. Each student shall be judged on the basis of how well he or she has command of the course materials.
Evaluation Weight Due Date Submission Time
Class Participation & Attendance
10%
Ongoing
10:10 AM Sharp
Weekly Learning Journals
30%
Every Thursday following class
12 NOON
Midterm Personal Application Paper
25%
Monday, October 28, 2019
12 NOON
Final Organizational Paper
35%
Monday, December 2
12 NOON
Class Participation & Attendance (10%)
It is each student’s responsibility to sign on the attendance sheet each session as it will be passed around during class (for yourself only, please).
The expectation for participation is for the student to be engaged, ask questions and provide comments that help facilitate the class in a forward-moving manner such that it allows for new ideas and different ways of thinking to flourish.
Weekly Learning Journals (30%)
One learning journal with three or four questions based on the session will be assigned after each class. As such, your personal takeaways from the sessions and on assigned readings will be essential in discussing what was particularly resonant, how does it connect with content from other courses or experiences and how might you begin to apply this within your personal, inter-personal and professional contexts.
Midterm - Personal Application Paper (25%)
The mid-term assignment is meant to offer an opportunity for reflection upon material covered and to apply it directly to a particularly important inter-personal context.
Your task will be to write about a particularly difficult inter-personal interaction in your life, either professional or personal – one that you felt completely dissatisfied about and did not turn out as planned. The focus of the paper should be on reflecting on the self and answering questions such as: Knowing what I know now… “What kind of tools could I have used to make the situation different / more favourable?” “What was my sense of self and perception of other? How did this play into the dynamic?” Further detail and requirements will be discussed throughout the first half of the course.
Final – Organization Audit & Application Paper (35%)
This assignment will be a group assignment with the intent of demonstrating your ability to integrate key ideas from the course and to apply them within an organizational context. Your group’s task will be to study the chosen organization, reflect upon its organizational culture and begin to articulate how you can make it even more inclusive. The focus will be to connect this inclusive culture to organizational aspirations for impact. Organizations to study and conduct research on will be provided to the class for each group to select upon. Further detail and requirements will be discussed throughout the first half of the course.
Criteria for Grading
Excellence in this course will be measured by how well students demonstrate the following in each assignment:
- Comprehension: Showing that you clearly understood the relevant material
(i.e description of definitions, concepts, ideas, frameworks, phenomena).
- Extension: Building upon your exiting knowledge and extending it to the core ideas covered in the course (i.e. how concepts, ideas and phenomena discussed in class relate to the real world).
- Application: Building upon your learning and integration through the course, how do you take a view to impacting your practices across domains currently or in the future.
COURSE FORMAT AND EXPECTATIONS
For Written Assignments:
As upper year undergraduates, it is my expectation that your written work will demonstrate sound grammar, appropriate vocabulary and a range of personal and professional styles of expression. Effective written communication is key to your success post-graduation, and I would like you to utilize the written assignments in this class to hone your writing style through recursive practice.
Please note that clear, concise, and correct writing will be considered in the evaluation of both the weekly reflection papers and your midterm paper. That is, you may lose points for writing that impedes communication: poor organization, weak paragraph development, excessive wordiness, hard-to-follow sentence structure, spelling mistakes and grammatical errors. Students who require additional support and/or tutoring with respect to their writing skills are encouraged to visit the Academic Success Centre (www.asc.utoronto.ca) or one of the College Writing Centres (www.writing.utoronto.ca/writing-centres). These centres are teaching facilities – not editing services, where trained staff can assist students in developing their academic writing skills. There is no charge for the instruction and support.
For Group Work:
The final group presentation requires students to work in teams of 4 to 6.
Learning to work together in teams is an important aspect of your education and preparation for your future careers. That said, project-based teamwork is often new to students and you are therefore reminded of the following expectations with respect to behaviour and contributions to your team project.
1. Read the document entitled, “Working in Teams: Guidelines for Rotman Commerce Students” which is available on the RC portal under the Academic Services tab.
2. When working in a team, Rotman Commerce students are expected to:
 Treat other members with courtesy and respect;
 Honour the ground rules established by the team;
 Contribute substantially and proportionally to the final project;
 Ensure enough familiarity with the entire contents of the group project/assignment so as to be able to sign off on it as original work;
 Meet the project timeline as established by the team.
3. Resolving conflicts:
Conflicts are part of the team’s process of learning how to work together effectively and when handled well can generate creativity and bring-multiple perspectives to the solution.
Student teams are collectively expected to work through their misunderstandings as soon as they arise (and prior to submission of the final project). In cases where teams are unable to arrive at a solution that works for all members, the team must meet with the Rotman Commerce Team Coach** as soon as possible. The Coach will listen to the
team and help develop options for improving the team process. All members of the project team must commit to, and, utilize their action plans.
** For an appointment with a Rotman Commerce Team Coach, please email Nouman Ashraf at nouman.ashraf@rotman.utoronto.ca who is a highly skilled at facilitating team dynamics and collaboration. Note that the Team Coach’s s role is to provide guidance, support and advice on team matters – not to formally evaluate or assess teamwork for academic purposes.
WEEKLY SCHEDULE
This course is intended to broaden your knowledge base and to offer you new tools thorough actively engaging with the most recent theories and frameworks, coupled with guest speakers who bring the contemporary perspective on innovation. Hence, active participation is key to your success in this course. Date Topic Guest Speaker Special Instructions
Friday, September 6, 2019
Welcome:
Enabling deep learning and goal setting for success in a safe space
Please note: This session will not simply be discussing what is obvious from the syllabus!
Friday, September 13, 2019
Understanding difference and its location within
One’s stance
John Shoesmith
Elizabeth Ridolfo
Resource Librarians
Thomas Fisher Rare Books Library
Please note that this session will be held at
The Thomas Fisher Rare Books Library – 120 St. George Street
Friday, September 20, 2019
Mapping the Identity Matrix and the spectrum
Of attitudes towards difference
Jeffrey Ross
Resource Centre Coordinator, First Nations House
Please note that this session will begin at First Nations House, 3rd Floor, Borden Building North, 563 Spadina Avenue
Friday, September 27, 2019
Connecting organizational purpose to organizational choices
Dr. Richard Chambers
Director, Multi-Faith Centre
Please note that this session will be held at
The Multifaith Centre at 569 Spadina Avenue
Friday, October 4, 2019
Uncovering systematic blindness
Friday, October 11, 2019
Making decisions in groups and why does leveraging
diversity of thought matter?
Lenore MacAdam
National Inclusion Leader, Deloitte
Friday, October 18, 2019
Linking diversity with a talent strategy
Rayyan Kamal
Program Manager, Diversity & Inclusion, BMO
Friday, October 25, 2019
Towards organizational practice:
Going beyond diversity statements
Dr. Denise O’Neil-Green
VP Equity & Inclusion, Ryerson
Friday, November 1, 2019
Connecting the self and other in an organizational context
Nation Cheong
VP, Community Opportunities and Mobilization, United Way Toronto
Friday, November 8, 2019
Reading Week
Friday, November 15, 2019
Honing one’s personal stance as a leader
Jane Griffith
Partner & National Diversity Leader, Odgers Berndston
Friday, November 22, 2019
Group Presentations on organizational strategy
Nicky Davis
Manager, Program Development, CBC
Friday, November 29, 2019
Future Directions: Leadership 2.0
John Monahan
Warden, Hart House
Please note that this class will be held at Hart House at 7 Hart House Circle
POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Missed Tests and Assignments (including midterm examinations)
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may submit a request for special consideration. The Request for Special Consideration Form and supporting documentation must be submitted in a timely manner in order for the request to be reviewed.
In such cases, students must notify the Rotman Commerce Program Office on the date of the course deliverable such as a missed test, or assignment missed class (in the case of participation marks), or due date. They must then complete a Request for Special Consideration Form and submit it along with supporting documentation (e.g. Verification of Student Illness or Injury form) to the Rotman Commerce Office within 2 business days of the originally scheduled course deliverable. Students who do not provide appropriate or sufficient supporting documentation will be given a grade of 0 (zero) for the missed course deliverable.
Documentation submitted in support of petitions for missing tests and assignments must be original; no faxed or scanned copies will be accepted.
Note that the physician’s report must establish that the patient was examined and diagnosed at the time of illness, not after the fact. Rotman Commerce will not accept a statement that merely confirms a later report of illness made by the student to a physician.
Late Assignments
All assignments are due at the time specified (i.e. 12 Noon) on the date specified in the course outline. Late submissions will normally be penalized by 20% if the assignment is not received on the specified date, at the specified time. A further penalty of 10% will be applied to each subsequent day. Please note that weekdays and weekends are treated identically in terms of penalty for lateness.
Students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit an assignment by its deadline must obtain approval from the instructor for an extension. Supporting documentation will be required as per the policy on missed tests and assignments.
Accessibility
The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility. If you require accommodations for a disability, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca or http://www.accessibility.utoronto.ca/
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarships at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectively, responsibly,
and fairly in this academic community ensures that the UofT degree that you earn will continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences, and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
 Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
 Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
 Making up sources or facts.
 Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed individually).
On test and exams:
 Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
 Looking at someone else's answers
 Misrepresenting your identity.
 Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation:
 Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
 Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to), medical notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any question about what is or is not permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other UofT resources such as College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre.
Email
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by email. As such, all UofT students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up AND properly entered on the ROSI system. For more information please visit http://help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Hotmail, Gmail, Yahoo or other type of email account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Hotmail, Gmail or Yahoo accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder.
Recording Lectures
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit permission, and may not do so unless permission is granted (note: students who have been previously granted permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are, of course, excepted). This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus materials, etc.
If permission is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to “publish” them in anyway. It is absolutely forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a website or sell them in any other form without formal permission.