1
Course Outline
RSM452H1 F LEC0101 Creativity and Business Innovation Fall 2020
Course Meets: Mondays / 2:10 to 4:00 pm EDT / Virtual Delivery
Instructor: Angèle Beausoleil, Rotman Bldg Rm 572.
E-Mail: angele.beausoleil@rotman.utoronto.ca
Phone: 416-946-3127
Office Hours: After class (4-5pm) or by appointment
Teaching Assistant: anjana.dattani@utoronto.ca
Course Scope and Mission
Creativity is identified as the most important skill business leaders need at all levels. As humans, we must first embrace and develop our creativity, and then use technology to creatively solve business problems. This course guides individuals to combine their thinking, knowledge and skills in imaginative ways, develop key creative behaviours and build your personal and professional creative confidence. Through a combination of active lectures, immersive in-class, online tutorials and ‘in-field activities’, you will engage in creative ways to see business problems and opportunities in new ways, and develop solutions unseen and unimagined by others.
Learning Objectives
In this course, students will:
 Learn how to develop your creative potential; how to unlock it, express it and foster it.
 Recognize that creativity is a process that requires active practice.
 Understand and practice divergent, convergent and reflective thinking.
 Gain experience using creative thinking tools to solve business problems and create a new product or service innovations.
Course format:
This course is an active and experiential learning course. Course materials will be delivered in interactive lectures, videos, podcasts and in the “field”. Students are expected to contribute in class discussions, comic book online presentations and engage in self-directed learning.
Statement on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or harassment against any persons or communities.
Required Technology
For Fall-Winter 2020-21, this course may be conducted entirely online. To participate fully and to complete the course successfully, you must ensure you have a computer with a working webcam, microphone and reliable access to an internet connection. For further details, please visit this link: Recommended Technology Requirements for Remote/Online Learning
2
Course Prerequisites
RSM 250H1 and completion of 14 FCE’s.
Course Exclusions
RSM 414H1
Required Readings
Note: The readings are subject to change - refer to updated readings in Modules on Quercus
Week 1:
 Podcast: Malcom Gladwell’s: how creativity works http://dcs.megaphone.fm/PP4639166845.mp3?key=7182838d59bae94e9130e32eb6c1a8cd
 Creativity Test: https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/creativity-quiz.htm
Week 2:
 Article: https://www.fastcompany.com/3040434/lessons-in-innovation-from-some-of-the-worlds-most-creative-thinkers
Week 3:
 Video: Tina Seeling, Divergent Thinking: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZeD7x0GoKEA
 Article: “Creative problem-solvers possess both Divergent and Convergent Thinking abilities.” https://medium.com/sparcit-blog/what-improves-ones-creative-abilities-brief-description-of-divergent-and-convergent-thinking-8d1cd11e5282
Week 4:
 Tutorial: How to plan and create a Comic Book https://design.tutsplus.com/tutorials/create-a-comic-how-to-plan-and-lay-out-your-comic--cms-24179
Week 5:
 Podcast: How to critique http://www.maximumfun.org/shmanners/art-critique
Week 6 and 7:
 Design as Applied Creativity: templates and guides provided
Week 8 and 9:
 Article: Dix, et al. (2006) Why bad ideas are a good idea. http://www.alandix.com/academic/papers/HCIed2006-badideas/HCIED2006-badideas-CRC-v2.pdf
Week 10:
 Article: https://www.upwork.com/hiring/design/how-to-create-an-effective-creative-brief/
 Article: NPD business cases and Creative collaborations
 Article: Rogers Five Factors
Week 11 and 12:
 Video: Pitching/Storytelling https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=9&v=OIgzzAMgnSU
 Article: https://medium.com/firm-narrative/want-a-better-pitch-watch-this-328b95c2fd0b
3
Additional Reading (not mandatory) for those who want to learn more
 Amabile, T. M. (1988). A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. Research in organizational behavior, 10(1), 123-167.
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2013). Creativity: The psychology of discovery and invention (Reprint ed.).
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. Harper Perennial, New York, 39.
 Dyer, J, Gregersen, H, & Christensen, C. (2011). The innovator’s DNA. Harvard business review, 87.
 Kelley, D., & Kelley, T. (2013). Creative confidence: Unleashing the creative potential within us all. Crown Pub.
 Kogerg, D. and Bagnall, J, (1930) The universal traveler: a soft-systems guide to creativity, problem solving, and the process of reaching goals. https://www.forgottenbooks.com/...pdf/The_Universal_Traveller_1000108013.pdf
 Nusbaum, E. C., & Silvia, P. J. (2011). Are intelligence and creativity really so different?: Fluid intelligence, executive processes, and strategy use in divergent thinking. Intelligence, 39(1), 36-45. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289610001303
Evaluation and Grades
Grades are a measure of the performance of a student in individual courses. Each student shall be judged on the basis of how well they have command of the course materials.
Work Due Date
Class Participation/Attendance 20% Ongoing
Creativity Self-Tests – in class (3x) 30% Week 2/ Week 6/ Week 10
Comic Book Business Case 25% Week 7
Creativity Project (Team) 25% Week 12
WEEKLY SCHEDULE
Note: schedule is subject to change–refer to most updated outline on Quercus
Session
Theme
Topic
Activity + What’s Due
Week 1
Course Overview
Creativity and Genius
Innovation-Readiness Quiz
Sept 14/20
Introduction to Creativity
Creative Confidence
Week 2
Creative Leaders
Key Innovator Behaviours: Associating/Questioning/ Observing/Networking/Experimenting
Creativity Self-Test 1 (5 min)
Sept 21/20
Innovator Types
Week 3
Divergent and Convergent Thinking
Creating choices and making choices
Analyze an article using divergent and convergent thinking
Sept 28/20
Week 4
Business of creativity
Creative Processes: Cirque du Soleil and Pixar
Associating: Create a mind map using creative processes
Oct 5/20 Week 5 HOLIDAY – NO CLASS Tutorial: case analysis Homework: Comic Case Oct 12/20
Week 6
Creative Analysis: Comic Book Business Case
Case Analysis and Synthesis
Creativity Self-Test 2 (5 min)
Oct 19/20
4
Week 7
Virtual Gallery:
How to provide a valuable critique (via comments)
DUE: Comic Book Case
Oct 26/20
Comic Book Exhibition
Week 8
Applied Creativity: Designing new products, programs and services
Creative agencies and Consultancies: guest panelists
Questioning and Observing practice
Nov 2/20 Nov 9/20 FALL READING WEEK
Week 9
Creative Collaborations
Collective creativity
Creative Problem-Solving Process
Nov 16/20 Week 10 Innovation Challenge Creative team forming Networking: Nov 23/20 Creativity Self-Test 3 (5 min)
Week 11
Desk Research: From Insights to Ideas
Creative processes, products and services examples
Experimenting:
Nov 30/20
Rogers 5 Factors Analysis
Idea Generation and Prototyping
Week 12
Presentations and course review
Team Project Presentations
DUE: Creativity Group Project
Dec 7/20
Creative confidence and key concepts reviewed
Class reflection
COURSE FORMAT AND EXPECTATIONS
For Written Assignments:
Please note that clear, concise, and correct writing will be considered in the evaluation of all Assignments. That is, you may lose points for writing that impedes communication: poor organization, weak paragraph development, excessive wordiness, hard-to-follow sentence structure, spelling mistakes and grammatical errors. Students who require additional support and/or tutoring with respect to their writing skills are encouraged to visit the Academic Success Centre (http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/asc) or one of the College Writing Centres (www.writing.utoronto.ca/writing-centres). These centres are teaching facilities – not editing services, where trained staff can assist students in developing their academic writing skills. There is no charge for the instruction and support.
For Group Work:
This course involves one group project which requires students to work in teams of 5-6. Working as a team is challenging; this is true both in the real world and in your academic classes. However, learning to work together in teams is an important aspect of your education and preparation for your future careers. You are encouraged to review the teamwork resources available to all Rotman Commerce students at https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/teamwork-resources while navigating these challenges, but keep in mind that supports are also available for when you think you may need extra help.
New in the 2020-2021 academic year, the Rotman Commerce Centre for Professional Skills (RC-CPS) will offer appointments with Teamwork Mentors for any teams encountering challenges in their teamwork. Some possible reasons you might book an appointment with a Teamwork Mentor include:
- Team members have identified constraints on their time, work or accommodations they require that conflict with necessary timelines for the team.
- Teams are unsure how to divide their workload for a team project.
5
- Teams are concerned about how to integrate the individual contributions of each member and how to ensure team members are contributing equally.
- Teams are concerned about how to ensure all group members are aware of academic integrity guidelines (e.g. properly attributing sources) and follow them.
- Teams would like to be able to communicate more effectively with each other, particularly when navigating a remote work academic environment.
To book a meeting with a Teamwork Mentor, send an email to rotmancommerce.teamworkhelp@utoronto.ca with the course code (e.g. RSM100) and team number (if available) in the subject line of the email. Any member of the team may reach out individually to book an appointment, but we also encourage teams to book their appointments as a team. You will normally receive a response within 24-36 hours, but note that during busy times of the semester the waiting period may be longer. Be proactive in booking your meeting, and do so as soon as challenges arise!
If you are a student registered with Accessibility Services, and extensions are one of your academic accommodations, you should consult with your Accessibility Advisor about this course. For considerations pertaining to teamwork and accessibility, please see information in the section on Accessibility Needs below under the Policies and Procedures heading.
Electronic Course Materials
This course will be using some electronic course materials: all available through Quercus.
Additional Course Materials
This course requires each student to purchase a personal journal/notebook which will act as your personalized text book. Details will be provided from the Quercus course page.
POLICY AND PROCEDURE
Missed Tests and Assignments
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may request special consideration.
In such cases, students must:
1. Notify the instructor AND the Rotman Commerce Program Office on the date of the missed course deliverable, e.g. missed test, final assessments, assignment or class (in the case of participation marks).
2. Complete a Request for Special Consideration Form and submit it along with supporting documentation this may include either your Self-Declaration of Absence on ACORN, or Verification of Student Illness or Injury form to the Rotman Commerce Office within 2 business days of the originally scheduled course deliverable.
Students who do not provide appropriate or sufficient supporting documentation will be given a grade of 0 (zero) for the missed course deliverable.
Note that documentation must clearly establish that you were ill or had other circumstances that prevented you from attending on the date in question. After-the-fact reports are not sufficient.
Late Assignments
All assignments are due at the beginning of class on the date specified in the course outline. Late submissions will normally be penalized by 5% if the assignment is not received on the specified date, at the specified time. A further penalty of 10% will be applied to each subsequent day.
6
Students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit an assignment by its deadline must obtain approval from the instructor for an extension. Supporting documentation will be required as per the policy on missed tests and assignments.
Absence
All students are expected to attend every class. Missing a class will result in a 5% penalty toward your participation grade. Students who are unable to attend a class due to illness, must obtain a doctor’s note.
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarships at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectively, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the UofT degree that you earn will continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences, and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
 Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
 Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
 Making up sources or facts.
 Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed individually).
On test and exams:
 Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
 Looking at someone else's answers
 Misrepresenting your identity.
 Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation:
 Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
 Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to), medical notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any question about what is or is not permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other UofT resources such as College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre.
Accessibility Needs
The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility. If you require accommodations for a temporary or ongoing disability or health concern, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible at accessibility.services@utoronto.ca or studentlife.utoronto.ca/as.
7
For courses with deliverables that require you to work in teams, please note the following. If you are a student registered with Accessibility Services, and extensions are one of your academic accommodations, requests for extensions impact everyone in the group. As a result, requests for late submissions of any component of teamwork will require compelling reasons, advance notice, and must work for everyone in the team. You are encouraged to discuss with your course instructor, Accessibility Advisor, and other team members what you need in order to successfully complete your coursework. Additionally, the Rotman Commerce Centre for Professional Skills offers Teamwork Mentors (see section above) who can help you and your team discuss how to support you effectively and how to develop a work plan that meets the needs and constraints of all team members.
Volunteer Notetaking
If you’re interested in helping to make our classroom more accessible, volunteer to be a notetaker!
Accessibility Services needs dependable volunteer notetakers to assist students living with a disability to achieve academic success. All you have to do is attend classes regularly and submit your notes consistently.
1. Register online as a Volunteer Note-Taker at:
https://clockwork.studentlife.utoronto.ca/custom/misc/home.aspx
2. Follow the link that says “Volunteer Notetakers”
3. Select your course and upload a sample of your notes
4. Once you have been selected as a notetaker, you’ll get an email notifying you to upload your Notes.
If you have any questions or require assistance, please email as.notetaking@utoronto.ca or call 416-978-6186.
Volunteers may receive co-curricular credit or a certificate of appreciation.
Email
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by email. As such, all UofT students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up AND properly entered on the ROSI system. For more information please visit http://help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Hotmail, Gmail, Yahoo or other type of email account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Hotmail, Gmail or Yahoo accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder.
Quercus and the Course Page
The online course page for this course is accessed through Quercus. To access the course page, go to q.utoronto.ca and log in using your UTORid and password. Once you have logged in, you will be at the Quercus Dashboard. On this page you will see all of the courses you are presently enrolled in. If you don’t see the course listed here but you are properly registered for the course in ROSI, wait 48 hours.
Recording Lectures
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit permission, and may not do so unless permission is granted (note: students who have been previously granted
8
permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are, of course, excepted). This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus materials, etc.
If permission is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to “publish” them in anyway. It is absolutely forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a website or sell them in any other form without formal permission.
Notice of video recording and sharing (Download and re-use prohibited)
This course, including your participation, will be recorded on video and will be available to students in the course for viewing remotely and after each session.
Course videos and materials belong to your instructor, the University, and/or other sources depending on the specific facts of each situation, and are protected by copyright. Do not download, copy, or share any course or student materials or videos without the explicit permission of the instructor.
For questions about recording and use of videos in which you appear please contact your instructor.