Capstone Project Course
Sample Syllabus
(This is a guide and will be modified by individual instructors)
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
The Capstone Project provides an opportunity for students to engage in high-level inquiry
focusing on an area of specialization within the profession. Capstone projects will be inquiry
and practice-centered and will draw upon areas of interest to the student and focus from the
program such as philosophy, sociology, policy, research, principles of pedagogy, curriculum
design, or technology, among others. All capstones aim to bridge theory and practice and are
aimed to have an impact on the professional life of students.
The aim of the course is to facilitate the development of your Capstone Projects. Students are
encouraged to apply and expend knowledge gained on teaching and learning throughout the
Master of Music Education program as part of this process.
COURSE OBJECTIVES :
The Capstone Project should demonstrate the depth and extent of knowledge of students.
Capstone projects may take a variety of formats (e.g., video, web, traditional text, media) of
scholarly work.
During this course, students will:
• Investigate and evaluate prominent literature connected to your CP;
• Develop an outline for thinking and practice that illuminates and brings insight to an area
of the music education field;
• Develop and create practical resources for music education settings.
• Present a clearly articulated investigative framework, while situating projects within
established academic practices and/ or ideas;
• Offer inquiry-based argumentation for educational/curricular change and adaptation
where conceptual propositions are tied to in-the-world realities.
REQUIRED TEXTS:
Readings
Texts will be available via dropbox. They will be an assortment of collected materials, providing
a wide-range view of capstone structures, conceptualizations and standpoints.
Additional materials will be provided as required by the instructor.
2 of 5
CLASS TIMES
Week 1 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 2 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 3 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 4 – Individual Work
Week 5 – Individual Work
Week 6 – Individual Work
Week 7 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 8 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 9 – Individual Work
Week 10 – Individual Work
Week 11 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 12 – Class Meetings All Students
Week 13 – Final Presentations
Individual meetings will be set up on a needs basis in conjunction with developing work.
ASSIGNMENTS:
All materials and assignments are to be delivered through OWL. Each student will create a
dropbox file in OWL and that file should be internally organized by each person. Drafts of
assignments will be placed in the individual dropbox.
An email to me (or to all, depending on the assignment) should accompany a dropbox posting.
There will be five assessed elements of the course:
Assignment Detail Weighting Due date
Assignment 1 Capstone Proposal
Outline
10%
Assignment 2 First draft or detailed
outline of theoretical
and practical parts of
capstone project
20%
Assignment 3 Revised second draft
of capstone
25%
Assignment 4 Public presentation of
overview of capstone
including multi-media
elements
20%
Assignment 5 Final version
of capstone document
25%
3 of 5
Capstone Proposal Outline
Assignment 1: develop a two to three-page detailed outline of your capstone:
1) Introduction – Explains the interest in the topic and situates the project in a scholarly and/or
practical context.
2) Goals and Process – Describes the goals and purpose of the project. The section will detail the
activities that will take place during the project, including who will be involved, and the role the
student will play.
3) Final Product and Timeframe – Outlines the timeline for the project. This section will also
detail the final format of the project and how it will be presented.
Drafts Assignments 2 and 3
I would like to see at least two drafts of the Capstone Project. See due dates in the table above.
Drafts should follow the outline of the final capstone detailed below
Assignments 4 and 5 - Final Capstone and Presentation
A condition of the capstone project is that students demonstrate the ability to gather materials,
review current literature, and to examine sufficient background material to inform the
development of original work.
To this end, the capstone projects should be thought of as in two parts:
1) A narrative-focused conceptual segment that describes and reflects upon the information
gathering process, as well as a literature review sufficient to provide a scholarly
contextualization of the topic.
a. Length will vary but a good expectation for this section would be 20 to 25 pages
(5000 to 7500 words, double line spaced); inclusive of references.
2) A practice-oriented segment where original and collected materials will be presented in
response to your identified topic.
a. Multimedia and web-based formats are highly encouraged in this segment of the
capstone.
b. Materials should be ‘sharable’ and aimed at impacting an area of work within
music education
A public presentation of the final project will be delivered in the last week of classes.
4 of 5
EVALUATION
Assignments will be evaluated according to the degree to which your work meets the following
criteria:
• Evidence of application of clearly articulated investigative framework to inform the
capstone project
• Offer of an inquiry-based argumentation for educational/curricular change and adaptation
relating theory to practice.
• Synthesis and evaluation of a relevant body of literature to contextualize the topic
• Development of appropriate and relevant practical resources for identified music
education settings.
• Ability to organize and illustrate project in oral and media presentation
• Ability to convey clear conceptualization of project and answer questions in public
presentation.
• Accurate use of English
• Accurate use of APA referencing
COURSE POLICIES:
Attendance Policy
Your punctual attendance and in-class participation are expected and vital to the academic
success of all learners. We expect that you will notify me in advance should you need to miss a
class. Given the seminar (low numbers) nature of this class, absence create significant disruption
to the class structure. Please plan ahead so that absences are avoided.
STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES:
The following websites may be useful to you in obtaining support during your studies:
Office of the Registrar
This site provides you with information on things like course enrollment, student finances, and
student records, as well as the latest updates from Student Central: http://www.registrar.uwo.ca/.
Services for Students with Disabilities
If you require accommodations to meet course objectives because of a documented disability,
please make an appointment with SSD as soon as possible so that we can ensure your full
participation in the course: http://www.sdc.uwo.ca/ssd/.
Support Services
“Students that are in emotional/mental distress should refer to Mental Health@Western
http://www.uwo.ca/uwocom/mentalhealth/ for a complete list of options about how to obtain help. ”
Any student looking to book an appointment with a physician, a counsellor, psychologist,
psychiatrist, in search of group care options, or any other service provided through Student
5 of 5
Health Services and Psychological Services must book an initial appointment in Student Health
Services, UCC 11 (Lower Level of the University Community Centre).
Crisis supports will continue to be offered in both Student Health Services (UCC 11) and
Psychological Services (WSSB 4100) during operating hours. Please call 911 if your safety, or
the safety of others is a concern. Additional crisis supports can be found here.
Students can book an appointment with Student Health Services or Psychological Services inperson
in UCC 11 (Monday-Friday 9:00a.m.-4:00p.m.), or by telephone at 519-661-3030.
If you require any further clarification, please email health@uwo.ca.
ACCOMMODATION FOR MEDICAL ILLNESS
The Policy on Accommodation for Medical Illness can be found at www.studentservices.uwo.ca/
secure/index.cfm. The University has a new policy on Accommodation for Medical Illness,
www.uwo.ca/univsec/handbook/appeals/medical.pdf, which states that “in order to ensure
fairness and consistency for all students, academic accommodation for work representing 10% or
more of the student’s overall grade in the course shall be granted only in those cases where there
is documentation indicating that the student was seriously affected by illness and could not
reasonably be expected to meet his/her academic responsibilities. Documentation shall be
submitted, as soon as possible, to the appropriate Dean’s office.”
UNIVERSITY POLICY ON PLAGIARISM
Plagiarism: Complete assignments independently. Submission of work with which you have
received help from someone else (other than the course instructor or TA) is an example of
plagiarism. Plagiarism is a major academic offence. Scholastic offences are taken seriously and
students are directed to read the appropriate policy, specifically, the definition of what
constitutes a Scholastic Offence, at the following website:
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/scholastic_discipline_undergr ad.pdf
STATEMENT ON ACADEMIC OFFENCES
Scholastic offences are taken seriously and students are directed to read the appropriate policy,
specifically, the definition of what constitutes a Scholastic Offence, at the following Web site:
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/scholastic_discipline_undergrad.pdf