1
University of Toronto – Sociology
Sociology of Crime and Deviance
SOC212H1S LEC5101
Summer 2023
Mondays & Wednesdays 18:10 – 20:00
Lecture location: https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/89851643914
Lecture Meeting ID: 898 5164 3914
Lecture Passcode: 643321
Instructor Information
Instructor: Jeffers, Storm
Email address: storm.jeffers@utoronto.ca
Instructor Office hours: Tuesdays 12:00-13:00 (or upon e-mail request) on Zoom at:
https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/81365989360
Office Hours Meeting ID: 813 6598 9360
Office Hours Passcode: 655819
Course web site: Quercus
Teaching Assistant: Kayla Preston, contact at kayla.preston@mail.utoronto.ca
TA office hours TBD in advance of and following the research paper/ podcast
Course Topic
This course will introduce students to major theoretical and substantive debates in the sociology of deviance and
crime. We will study classical and contemporary theoretical contributions to the understanding of deviance and
social control, including anomie and strain theories, conflict theories, labelling theory, control theory and
learning and socialization theories.
Conceptual and historical issues in crime and deviance will be discussed, including violent crime, financially
motivated crime, social responses to drugs and addiction, power, sex work, gender, sexuality, Indigeneity, the
body, and stigma. A main objective of the course is to connect theoretical approaches with empirical research
and to illustrate how deviance and crime manifest in everyday life.
Learning Goals & Outcomes
• Acquire an introductory understanding of the sociology of crime and deviance
• Identify and critically assess various sociological theories and their effectiveness in explaining crime
and deviance
• Connect and apply course concepts, theories and examples to empirical research and current events
• Think critically about the relationships between legal and other social practices.
• Formulate research questions, collect appropriate sources and use scholarly research to develop and
produce an academic argument
• Write critically and creatively
• Communicate individual and collaborative assessments of selected cases
• Engage in thoughtful and respectful discussion
• See sociology at work in your everyday life
Prerequisites & Exclusions
Prerequisite: SOC100H1
Exclusion: SOC212Y1; SOC211H5
Students without the prerequisite to take this course will be removed at any time discovered.
2
Course Materials
Anderson, L. Deviance: Social Constructions and Blurred Boundaries. 2017.
This book is available digitally within the University of Toronto’s library catalogue. All other assigned readings
will be made available on Quercus.
Evaluation Components & Grading Policies
Grading
All quizzes and written assignments must be submitted to Quercus. Pre-class quizzes submitted after 17:00 of
the day of the class meeting time will not be graded. There will be pre-class quizzes for classes on: July 10, July
12, July 17, July 19, July 24, July 26, July 31, August 2, August 9, August 14, August 15. Of these 11 pre-class
quizzes, you must complete 8. Pre-class quizzes will be open for completion 24 hours in advance of due date.
Pre-class quizzes are open book but should be completed after the readings/ viewings have been completed.
Each quiz is worth 7.5%, which makes up 60% of your grade. You must complete at least 4 quizzes on or
before July 26. Please be aware that there are 2 quizzes scheduled back-to-back on the last 2 days of class.
Students who anticipate that having to complete both of these quizzes will adversely impact their performance
are advised to plan accordingly to avoid the necessity to complete both these quizzes.
Participation marks are based on in-class participation. You will be graded for participation based on 10 class
sessions out of 12. With each class’s participation marks being worth 1%.
The penalty for late written assignments is 10% for the first day and 5% for each additional day. This includes
weekends (not stat holidays). Assignments that are more than 7 days late will not be accepted without approved
supporting documentation. For more details on assignments, see Quercus.
TYPE DESCRIPTION DUE
DATE WEIGHT
OUTLINE
ASSIGNMENT
(OPTIONAL)
Outline your topic and research question
for your research essay/podcast. Locate a
case and overview your main argument and
academic sources related to your topic.
July 21
(23:59)
10% (changes
the weight of
the research
paper/podcast
to 20%)
PRE-LECTURE
QUIZZES
Multiple choice, short, and long answer
questions for 8 classes of your choosing out
of 11 class sessions.
17:00
before the
class
meeting
time
60% (7.5 %
each)
RESEARCH
PAPER/
PODCAST
Develop a scholarly argument about your
essay or podcast topic, drawing from class
materials, academic sources, and nonacademic
sources (individually or with a
partner).
August 11
(23:59) 30%
PARTICIPATION Participate in lecture-based surveys and
discussion groups. Ongoing 10%
3
Requests for grade increases at the end of the term will not be granted. Final grades will be earned, and will
reflect your contribution to the class atmosphere, your insights/research/ writing skills on the research paper or
your insights/ research/ and presentation skills on the podcast, your attention to the lecture and course materials,
and your preparation for quizzes.
Class Format
Lectures for this class will take place in person on Zoom at:
-https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/89851643914
-Meeting ID: 898 5164 3914
-Passcode: 643321
Office hours will take place on Zoom. Assignments and quizzes will take place and be submitted on Quercus.
Lectures employ active and applied approaches to learning. During the semester, students will apply course
concepts to real-world situations. Readings and lectures will be supplemented with videos, music, case studies,
news stories, documentaries and policy papers that address current issues regarding crime and deviance.
Through group discussions and activities, students will develop a greater understanding for course materials and
how they impact their daily lives.
Students are expected to read the required material before each lecture (regardless of whether you are doing a
pre-class quiz for that lecture). Lectures will expand upon the readings yet will not review them in detail.
Lectures are not an adequate substitute for the readings, readings are not an adequate substitute for lecture.
If you have any questions, feel free to email the course instructor, login to Quercus for office hours, or request a
meeting with the course instructor via e-mail. Please check your utoronto.ca email and Quercus regularly for
updates.
Class Schedule
DATE
TOPICS READINGS/ VIEWINGS
JUL.
5
Course Introduction &
Class Survey Syllabus
JUL.
10
Basics & Measuring
Deviance
Anderson
- Chapter 1
- Chapter 2
4
JUL.
12
Positivistic & Structural
Theories
Anderson
- Chapter 3
JUL.
17
Symbolic Interactionist &
Social Constructionist
Theories
Anderson
- Chapter 4
JUL.
19
Conflict Theories, Control,
Resistance
Class, Gender, Race
Siegel & McCormick
- Chapter 9
Heitzeg, N. A. (2015). 'Whiteness,' criminality, and
the double standards of deviance/social
control. Contemporary Justice Review : CJR, 18(2),
197-214.
“Heroes and Villains: Is hip-hop a cancer or a cure? |
Lecrae | TEDxNashville”:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BFas9cd8ZZ8
JUL.
24
Homicide & Gangs
Anderson
- Chapter 5
Scot Wortley, and Julian Tanner, Respect, friendship
and racial injustice: justifying gang membership in a
Canadian city, (2008).
JUL.
26
Drugs (Scares, Policy,
Strategies of Social
Control)
Reinarman, C. (1994). The social construction of
drug scares. In P. Adler and P. Adler (Eds.)
Constructions of Deviance: Social Power, Context,
and Interaction (pp. 92-105). CA: Brooks/Cole
Publishing Company.
Shachar, C., Wise, T., Katznelson, G., & Campbell,
A. L. (2020). Criminal justice or public health: A
comparison of the representation of the crack cocaine
and opioid epidemics in the media. Journal of Health
Politics, Policy and Law, 45(2), 211-239.
Anderson
- Chapter 10: 278-279; 292-297; 301-309
Canadian Drug Summary: Cannabis: pg. 3 (Legal
Status of Cannabis in Canada)
About the Good Samaritan Act:
https://www.canada.ca/en/health5
canada/services/opioids/about-good-samaritan-drugoverdose-
act.html
JUL.
31
Sexuality
Sex Work & LGBTQ
Identities
*COURSE DROP
DATE*
Anderson
- Chapter 11: 312-314; 326-344
Chapter 14
AUG.
2
Sex & Consent
Sexual Assault & BDSM
Anderson
- Chapter 6
Dunkley, C. R., & Brotto, L. A. (2020). The role of
consent in the context of BDSM. Sexual
Abuse, 32(6), 657-678.
AUG.
7
Civic Holiday No Readings, No Lecture
AUG.
9
Bodies
‘Good’, ‘Bad’, & ‘Ugly’
Bodies
Bereska
Chapter 7
Penner, A. M., & Saperstein, A. (2008). How social
status shapes race. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences - PNAS, 105(50), 19628-
19630.
AUG.
14
Indigeneity
The Ongoing Colonial
Project & Issues of
Appropriation
“Introduction” from the Truth and Reconciliation
Final Report (1-6)
“Legacy" in 'A Knock on the Door'(129-141)
'Reconciliation' in 'A Knock on the Door' (142-162)
Calls to Action
https://fncaringsociety.com/sites/default/files/truth_a
nd_reconciliation_commission_of_canada_calls_to_a
6
ction.pdf?fbclid=IwAR10Cj24bsrCwt8nurp_Q8j85S
2Zobq_BMhidBh0YYqeMBovOYd-ozYTaAg
Accountability Update Summary from the
Yellowhead Institute (emphasis on page
5): https://yellowheadinstitute.org/wpcontent/
uploads/2022/12/TRC-Report-12.15.2022-
Yellowhead-Institute-min.pdf
A Cold and Desperate Walk (Macleans 2005)
“Healing through story: Unpacking Indigenous
resiliency and hope | Annie Belcourt”:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDVwebiriAo
AUG.
15
Indigeneity (cont’d)
The Ongoing Colonial
Project, Issues of
Appropriation, &
Considerations for Settlers
& Course Conclusion
Cultural Appropriation Vs. Cultural Appreciation:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vfAp_G735r0
“Native Americans Review Music Festival Fashion”:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kmrE2wqJOQ8
“Native Americans Review ‘Indian’ Sports
Mascots”:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HTBT-_F6oYw
“Remembrance Day ‘Sergeant’ Not in Military:
DND (Franck Gervais)”:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B7QI2EzT28s
The course schedule and reading list are subject to change at the discretion of the instructor.
The drop date for this class is July 31st, 2023.
Procedures and Rules
Absence Declaration:
The University is temporarily suspending the need for a doctor’s note or medical certificate for any absence
from academic participation. Please use the Absence Declaration tool on ACORN found in the Profile and
Settings menu to formally declare an absence from academic participation in the University. The tool is to be
used if you require consideration for missed academic work. If a personal or family crisis prevents you from
meeting a deadline, you must contact your college registrar and have your registrar send the instructor (not the
TA) an email - (it is a good idea anyway to advise your college registrar if a crisis is interfering with your
studies). In addition to this declaration, you are responsible for contacting me to request the academic
consideration you are seeking. You will be notified by the University if this policy changes.
Missed Quizzes and Assignments
Missed Quizzes
Pre-class quizzes submitted after 17:00 of the day of the class meeting time will not be graded.
7
Late Assignments
You are expected to complete assignments (including the optional outline assignment and the research
paper/podcast) on time. In order not to be considered late, assignments must be submitted to Quercus by the
due date on the syllabus. The paper will automatically be submitted to Ouriginal.com. Assignments not
submitted through Ouriginal will receive a grade of zero (0%) unless a student instead provides, along
with their research paper, sufficient secondary material (e.g., reading notes, outlines of the paper, rough
drafts of the final draft, etc.) to establish that the paper they submit is truly their own. The alternative (not
submitting via Ouriginal) is in place because, strictly speaking, using Ouriginal is voluntary for students at
the University of Toronto.
You are expected to keep a back-up and a hard copy of your assignment in case it is lost. Email drafts of
your paper to yourself regularly, in case of computer malfunction. You are responsible for ensuring that a
readable draft has been submitted (papers full of symbols may be subject to late penalties.
Late assignments for reasons that are within your control will be penalized 10% for the first day and 5% per
each subsequent day. Assignments that are more than 7 days late will not be accepted.
The penalty will run from the day the assignment was due until the day it is submitted electronically to
Quercus.
The penalty period includes weekends (not stat holidays).
Late assignments must be submitted to Quercus.
Re-marking Pieces of Term Work
General
A student who believes that their written term work has been unfairly marked may ask the person who
marked the work for re-evaluation. Students have up to two weeks from the date of return of an item of term
work or from the date the mark was made available to inquire about the mark and file for an appeal. Once a
request has been submitted, a student can expect acknowledgement within 3 days. Please note that upon
regrading, your mark may go up, down, or stay the same.
If an academic misconduct case is in progress for the piece of term work in question, a student may not
appeal until the matter is resolved.
Details
Regrade requests for term work may be submitted to the person who marked the work for re-evaluation. The
student must submit (1) the original piece of work and (2) a written explanation detailing why they believe
the work was unfairly/incorrectly marked. If the student is not satisfied with this re-evaluation, they may
appeal to the instructor in charge of the course if the work was not marked by the instructor (e.g., was
marked by a TA). In the instances where the instructor was not the one who marked the work, the student
must now submit to the instructor (1) the original piece of work, (2) the written reasons as to why they
believe the work was unfairly/incorrectly marked, and (3) communications from the original marker as to
why no change in mark was made. If a remarking is granted by an instructor, the student must accept the
resulting mark as the new mark, whether it goes up or down or remains the same. Continuing with the
remark or the appeal means the student accepts this condition. Instructors and TAs should ensure all
communication with the student is in writing (e.g. follow-up email) and keep a copy for later reference.
8
This process applies only to term work; appeals for re-reads of final examinations are handled directly by
the Office of the Registrar.
Electronic Communication and Electronic Learning Technology
Email communication is rapid, convenient, and efficient—and you are encouraged to use it to enhance your
learning and experience in the course. With that said, it is essential that you follow a few rules:
• Assignments will not be accepted via email. See above for how to submit them.
• All course communication should be conducted through Quercus or your utoronto e-mail account.
• All emails must include the course code (e.g., SOC212) in the subject line.
• All emails should be signed with the student’s full name and student number.
• Emails from students will generally be answered within 48 hours of receipt.
• Treat emails as you would any other professional communication.
• Emails that ask questions that are answered in the course syllabus or website (e.g., “how much is
assignment X worth”) will not receive a response.
Emails that do not follow these guidelines will not receive a response.
Academic Integrity
Copying, plagiarizing, falsifying medical certificates, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be
tolerated. Any student caught engaging in such activities will be referred to the Dean’s office for
adjudication and punishment. Any student abetting or otherwise assisting in such misconduct will also be
subject to academic penalties.
AI Tools: The use of generative artificial intelligence tools and apps for the completion, or to support the
completion of course work is strictly prohibited in all course assignments (presentations, quizzes, outlines,
research podcasts/ papers) unless explicitly stated otherwise by the instructor in this course. This includes
ChatGPT and other AI writing and coding assistants. Use of generative AI in this course may be considered
use of an unauthorized aid, which is a form of cheating. This course policy is designed to promote your
learning and intellectual development and to help you reach course learning outcomes.
Working with Other Students: Students are prohibited from working with other students towards the
completion of course quizzes. Quizzes are to be completed individually. Working with others to complete
the quizzes is considered to be a form of cheating.
Students are permitted to work with another student of their choosing for the research assignment/ podcast
assignment.
We expect students to cite sources in all written work and presentations. See this link for department citation
formats and tips for how to use sources well http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/sociology/resources/resourcesstudents
.
By enrolling in this course, students agree to abide by the university’s rules regarding academic conduct, as
outlined in the Calendar.
You are expected to have read and understood the on-line document “How Not to Plagiarize”
(http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/using-sources/how-not-to-plagiarize)
You are expected to be familiar with the “Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
9
(www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm) and Code of Student Conduct
(http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/studentc.htm) which spell out your rights, your duties
and provide all the details on grading regulations and academic offences at the University of Toronto.
Normally, students will be asked to submit their course essays to Ouriginal.com for a review of textual
similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as
source documents in the Ouriginal.com reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of
detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the University's use of the Ouriginal.com service is described
on the Ouriginal.com web site. Assignments not submitted through Ouriginal will receive a grade of zero
(0%) unless a student instead provides, along with their research paper, sufficient secondary material
(e.g., reading notes, outlines of the paper, rough drafts of the final draft, etc.) to establish that the paper they
submit is truly their own. The alternative (not submitting via Ouriginal) is in place because, strictly
speaking, using Ouriginal is voluntary for students at the University of Toronto.
Student Rights & Resources
Accessibility Centre
We take seriously our obligation to make this course as welcoming and accessible as feasible for students
with diverse needs. Students are encouraged to registrar with the Centre (and, if appropriate, alert the
instructor) as early in the term as possible. In many instances, it is easier to arrange certain accommodations
with more advance notice, so we strongly encourage you to act as quickly as possible. With that said we
understand that disabilities can change over time and will do our best to accommodate you. Students seeking
support must have an intake interview with a disability advisor to discuss their individual needs.
To schedule a registration appointment with a disability advisor, please call the Centre at 416-978-8060 or email
at: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca. See also http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/as.
The university has many Writing Centres which offer workshops, seminars and individual appointments to
help students identify and develop their skills. Check out http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/writing-centres/artsand-
science for more information.
Equity & Diversity
The University of Toronto is committed to equity and respect for diversity. All members of the learning
environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect. As a course instructor, I
will neither condone nor tolerate behaviour that undermines the dignity or self-esteem of any individual in
this course and wish to be alerted to any attempt to create an intimidating or hostile environment. It is our
collective responsibility to create a space that is inclusive and welcomes discussion. Discrimination,
harassment and hate speech will not be tolerated. If you have any questions, comments, or concerns you may
contact the UOT Equity and Diversity officer.