Faculty of Arts and Sciences - Department of Sociology
SOC312H1 S Syllabus – Valid as of 2024-01-22 Page 1
SOC312H1 S Population and Society - Winter 2024Course Meetings SOC312H1 S
Section
Day & Time
Delivery Mode & Location
LEC0101
Thursday, 11:10 AM - 1:00 PM
In Person:
Refer to ACORN for the most up-to-date information about the location of the course meetings.
Course Contacts
Instructor: Professor Brent Berry
Email: brent.berry@utoronto.ca
Office Hours and Location: Thursday 2:30-4pm Location: room 17110, 700 University Ave
Additional Notes: office hours can also be attended virtually using Teams link on Quercus.
Course Overview
This introductory course examines Canada's population in a global context, covering a broad range of population issues and perspectives. Topics include (a) demographic data and methods, (b) population composition in terms of age, sex, and nuptiality, (c) demographic processes of fertility, mortality, internal and international migration, (d) the relationship between population change and urbanization, and (e) the role of social policy on population change. For all course topics, the instructor will examine historical and cross-national trends and review proposed explanations.
This introductory course examines Canada's population in a global context, covering a broad range of population issues and perspectives. Topics include (a) demographic data and methods, (b) population composition in terms of age, sex, and nuptiality, (c) demographic processes of fertility, mortality, internal and international migration, (d) the relationship between population change and urbanization, and (e) the role of social policy on population change. For all course topics, the instructor will examine historical and cross-national trends and review proposed explanations.
Course Learning Outcomes
Prerequisites: 1.0 SOC credit at the 200+ level
Corequisites: None
Exclusions: SOC312Y1, SOC325H1, SOC356H5
Recommended Preparation: None
SOC312H1 S Syllabus – Valid as of 2024-01-22 Page 2
Credit Value: 0.5
Course Materials
The readings are from our course textbook titled Canada’s Population in a Global Context: An Introduction to Social Demography (Second Edition). By Frank Trovato (2015, Oxford), which can be purchased from the University Bookstore (both eBook and physical copies are available).
Marking Scheme
Assessment
Percent
Details
Due Date
Term test
25%
2 hour in-class test
2024-04-04
response papers
20%
10 response papers, up to 500 words each, submitted weekly night before class.
2024-01-17,2024-01-24,2024-01-31,2024-02-07,2024-02-14,2024-02-28,2024-03-06,2024-03-13,2024-03-20,2024-03-27
exercise
20%
2024-02-15
individual research paper
35%
2024-03-28
Late Assessment Submissions Policy
I accept late work in the case of valid medical or personal reasons. I will use my judgement about accepting late work.
Policies & Statements
Plagiarism Detection Tool
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University's plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool's reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the University's use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation web site (https://uoft.me/pdt-faq).
SOC312H1 S Syllabus – Valid as of 2024-01-22 Page 3
Religious Accommodations
As a student at the University of Toronto, you are part of a diverse community that welcomes and includes students and faculty from a wide range of cultural and religious traditions. For my part, I will make every reasonable effort to avoid scheduling tests, examinations, or other compulsory activities on religious holy days not captured by statutory holidays. Further to University Policy, if you anticipate being absent from class or missing a major course activity (such as a test or in-class assignment) due to a religious observance, please let me know as early in the course as possible, and with sufficient notice (at least two to three weeks), so that we can work together to make alternate arrangements.
Students with Disabilities or Accommodation Requirements
Students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. If you have an acute or ongoing disability issue or accommodation need, you should register with Accessibility Services (AS) at the beginning of the academic year by visiting https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/department/accessibility-services/. Without registration, you will not be able to verify your situation with your instructors, and instructors will not be advised about your accommodation needs. AS will assess your situation, develop an accommodation plan with you, and support you in requesting accommodation for your course work. Remember that the process of accommodation is private: AS will not share details of your needs or condition with any instructor, and your instructors will not reveal that you are registered with AS.
Academic Integrity
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/secretariat/policies/code-behaviour-academic-matters-july-1-2019). If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research and citation methods, please reach out to me. Note that you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from me or from other institutional resources. For example, to learn more about how to cite and use source material appropriately and for other writing support, see the U of T writing support website at http://www.writing.utoronto.ca. Consult the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters for a complete outline of the University's policy and expectations. For more information, please see A&S Student Academic Integrity (https://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/current/academic-advising-and-support/student-academic-integrity) and the University of Toronto Website on Academic Integrity (https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca).
Specific Medical Circumstances
If you become ill and it affects your ability to do your academic work, consult me right away. Normally, I will ask you for documentation in support of your specific medical circumstances. This documentation can be an Absence Declaration (via ACORN) or the University's Verification of Student Illness or Injury (VOI) form. The VOI indicates the impact and severity of the illness, while protecting your privacy about the details of the nature of the illness. If you cannot submit a VOI due to limits on terms of use, you can submit a different form (like a letter from a doctor), as long as it is an original document, and it contains the same information as the VOI (including
SOC312H1 S Syllabus – Valid as of 2024-01-22 Page 4
dates, academic impact, practitioner's signature, phone and registration number). For more information on the VOI, please see
http://www.illnessverification.utoronto.ca. For information on Absence Declaration Tool for A&S students, please see https://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/absence. If you get a concussion, break your hand, or suffer some other acute injury, you should register with Accessibility Services as soon as possible.
Accommodation for Personal Reasons
There may be times when you are unable to complete course work on time due to non-medical reasons. If you have concerns, speak to me or to an advisor in your College Registrar's office; they can help you to decide if you want to request an extension or other forms of academic consideration. They may be able to email your instructors directly to provide a College Registrar's letter of support and connect you with other helpful resources on campus.
Make-Up Quizzes/Tests
This item is listed here to remind you that you may wish to include your policy on make-up quizzes and term tests in your syllabus. There is some latitude in designing a policy that will work in the context of your course, but any policy works best if it is stated clearly from the outset and applied fairly and consistently. See Section 5.3 in the A&S Academic Handbook (https://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/faculty-staff/teaching/academic-handbook#TermTests).
Quercus Info (if using)
This Course uses the University's learning management system, Quercus, to post information about the course. This includes posting readings and other materials required to complete class activities and course assignments, as well as sharing important announcements and updates. New information and resources will be posted regularly as we move through the term. To access the course website, go to the U of T Quercus log-in page at https://q.utoronto.ca. SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT GRADES POSTED ONLINE: Please also note that any grades posted are for your information only, so you can view and track your progress through the course. No grades are considered official, including any posted in Quercus at any point in the term, until they have been formally approved and posted on ACORN at the end of the course. Please contact me as soon as possible if you think there is an error in any grade posted on Quercus.
Mental Health and Well-being
As a student, you may experience challenges that can interfere with learning, such as strained relationships, increased anxiety, substance use, feeling down, difficulty concentrating and/or lack of motivation, financial concerns, family worries and so forth. These factors may affect your academic performance and/or reduce your ability to participate fully in daily activities. Everyone feels stressed now and then – it is a normal part of university life. Some days are better than others, and there is no wrong time to reach out. There are resources for every situation and every level of stress. There are many helpful resources available through your College Registrar or through Student Life (http://studentlife.utoronto.ca and http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/feeling-distressed). An important part of the University experience is learning how and when to ask for help. Please take the time to inform yourself of available resources.
SOC312H1 S Syllabus – Valid as of 2024-01-22 Page 5
Online Communication
Instructors are strongly advised to require students use their mail.utoronto.ca email addresses for all course-related communications, and to flag for students that they are expected to check this address regularly. University of Toronto email accounts are more secure, and are also governed by the institution's codes of conduct, meaning that the University has recourse to address any inappropriate communications (e.g., racist, aggressive, threatening, harassing, etc.) between students and other students as well as with the instructor. Also, if a student claims to have emailed you an assignment, this can be verified by IT staff if needed. For these reasons, instructors can state that they will only respond to emails received from a mail.utoronto.ca account. Note that Quercus has a built-in communication tool, called "Inbox". This is not the same as email. Instructors are advised to review its functions and limitations. If you prefer students to use email instead, you should clearly specify this expectation. You may also wish to remind students not to include attachments in replies to any Quercus system notifications they receive through email; messages with attachments included in replies to these system notification messages are not sent to the instructor.