1
New Topics in Sociology:
Invisible Punishment
SOC489H1S| Winter 2024 | University of Toronto
Room: | Day and Time: Monday 11:10 am – 1pm
COURSE DESCRIPTION
When we think of punishment, we often think of incarceration. However, punishment often does not end when people leave prisons or after sentences are served. Having a criminal record regularly leaves a mark on someone’s life that is difficult to overcome. This course explores the afterlife of incarceration and the ‘collateral’ consequences of coming into contact with the criminal justice system for single individuals, their families, and communities. The course will explore both formal measures established by states and consequences acting through more informal channels such as stigma and financial insecurity. Attention will be paid to how these intersect with and reproduce inequality in society. The course will mostly focus on Canada and the US, but lecture and assigned readings will also offer glimpses of consequences of punishment and a criminal record in a more global context. The latter part of the course will be dedicated to resisting invisible punishment: from existing mechanisms such as pardons and expungements to alternative proposals and approaches to end invisible punishment. The assigned readings and material covered in the seminar will follow recent attempts to decolonialize the curriculum on criminal justice.
Course Instructor
Email
Office
Student Hours
Erika Canossini
erika.canossini@mail.utoronto.ca
Monday 1.30pm – 3pm
in person or on Zoom
or by appointment
The prerequisite to take SOC489 is 1.0 SOC at the 300-level. Students without this requirement will be removed.
Welcome!
Hello! I am so pleased you are in my invisible punishment course!
My teaching philosophy is organized around three key principles: reciprocity, choice and transparency.
I see the classroom as a space for the exchange and development of ideas and curiosity. We learn more easily when in conversation with others. We learn by listening, asking questions and explaining. The course has been created with the intent to foster interactions among students by including discussions and group activities to class time rather than me simply delivering content. You will also have the opportunity to further pursue this collaborative learning by engaging in conversations with your peers through some of the assignments.
As my goal is to create a community of learners who will help each other understand and explore the course material and issues, it is essential for you to keep up with the readings and to read actively so that you can meaningfully contribute to others’ learning. Learning is a process, and I am learning as you are.
2
I included multiple ways for you to demonstrate your knowledge and comprehension of the material since not everyone excels in the same kind of assignments. The course will allow students to build their own individualized learning plan that best suits their interests, learning styles and schedules.
These are my goals as an instructor for this course:
o
Assist students in analyzing academic literature and reflecting / conversing / writing about it as both individual and collective learners;
o
Continue to develop students' critical thinking and reading skills;
o
Foster students’ interest in criminal justice issues.
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or that exclude you, please get in touch with me. Together, we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course.
This syllabus describes how the course is organized, what the learning components are and much more. Please read this document carefully, so we are all on the same page. Have a copy with you to our first meeting as we will go over it together.
LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to acknowledge the sacred land on which the University of Toronto operates. It occupies the Treaty Lands and Territory of the Mississaugas of the Credit River First Nation and the traditional territory of the Huron-Wendat, Peturn First Nations and Seneca. Tkaronto (“where there are trees standing in the water” in Mohawk) is located on the lands of the Toronto Purchase Treaty, No. 13, reached between the Mississaugas of the Credit First Nation and the British Crown in 1805 and disputed until 2010. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many First Nations, Inuit, and Métis people from across Turtle Island. I am grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land. We also acknowledge the African ancestors who were forcibly brought to Canada and gave their labour for free in this land and we acknowledge that their descendants are still grappling with the legacies of slavery.
Many of us have little to no knowledge about the names of the territories we grew up on or currently live or study in and the Indigenous nations and peoples who have cared for the land. If you have no idea or want to know more, start at: https://native-land.ca OR https://www.whose.land/en/
This page from UofT libraries also offers some resources to learn more about Tkaronto Indigenous past and present (https://guides.library.utoronto.ca/Toronto)
Table Of Contents
Course Description ...................................1
Land Acknowledgement .......................2
Learning Outcomes ............................3
Communications .................................3
Course Organization ...........................4
Evaluation Components .......................5
Missed Term Work ...............................9
Grading Policies ................................. 10
Academic Integrity ............................. 11
Course Schedule ................................ 12
Resources ........................................... 18
3
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After the course, you should be able to:
1.
Understand and explain how contact with the criminal justice system can reverberate into other life domains;
2.
Assess and wage in current debates on the consequences of imprisonment and criminalization;
3.
Recognize and think critically about the differential impact that major criminal justice institutions have by gender, race, class, nationality, sexuality and much more;
4.
Think critically and analytically about the purpose and limitations of punishment, penal practices, and official discourses on punishment;
5.
Develop your critical reading and writing skills;
6.
Learn how to synthesize and present academic research for the general public.
COMMUNICATIONS
Questions
On the Quercus course page, under the discussion tab you will find a discussion board called Questions about the Course. This discussion is to be used for all course related questions of a non-personal nature (e.g., course content, assignments, exams, and deadlines). In this way, all clarifications provided are available to every student.
Before asking questions, please check the syllabus. A lot of information on the course is already detailed here.
Emails
Feel free to contact me by e-mail for any questions of a more personal nature regarding illness, special accommodation, grade review, or anything else you might want to discuss with me privately.
Email is most suitable for questions that are clear, concise, and easily answerable. If you need help with course material, I strongly encourage you to attend student hours or make a virtual/in person appointment.
All e-mails are answered within 48h (except weekends and holidays).
You must use your official University of Toronto email. Please also include the course code (e.g., SOC489) in the subject line and your full name and student # in your message. Send a follow up if we haven’t replied within 48 hours (excluding weekends and holidays).
Politeness, respect and gratitude are much appreciated, such as saying hi or hello before asking a question. You can call me Erika (she/her). Some of you may feel uncomfortable calling me by my first name, but that’s okay! Other options are Instructor Erika or Instructor Canossini.
Student Hours
Mondays
1.30pm - 3pm
You can drop by my office or connect to the Zoom meeting link available on the Quercus home page. No need to let me know you plan to attend.
If you would like to meet and cannot make this time, use the link posted on Quercus to book an appointment.
NB: You don’t need to have a question to attend student hours. My door is always open!
4
COURSE ORGANIZATION
Class Format The course will be run as a seminar. Class will be in person and will include a combination of lecture, larger group discussions and small-group activities. You are expected to complete at least a first read of all assigned material before coming to class. Doing so is necessary if you wish to be an engaged and active member of the class, and your grade also depends on it (see the readings journal deadline and in class participation).
Classes will be structured as follows:
A.
11:10-11.40am = Lecture on weekly class topic
B.
11:40-12:10pm = Group discussion on topic and assigned readings
C.
12:10-12:35pm = Skills workshop
D.
12:35-1:00pm = Self-directed group work
A.
Each week we will take up a different topic related to invisible punishment which will be presented in the form of a lecture by the instructor. These brief lectures at the beginning of each class will give students a succinct overview of the topic at hand while also serving as background information for your podcast team project. Lecture content will include information that is not covered in the readings and readings will include material that is not always covered in lectures. Lecture slides will be made available to students.
B.
This portion of class is dedicated to hearing each other’s voice on the issue at hand and discussing the lecture content and the assigned readings. I encourage you to ask questions and provide comments in a respectful and courteous manner that is consistent with classroom etiquette policies and the community agreement we will create on the first day of class.
C.
Each week we will engage in an instructor-led workshop on a skill that is directly relevant to your podcast team project. These workshops are designed: (i) to be directly relevant to the stage of the podcast project groups are currently engaged with, (ii) to provide guidance on how to move forward and progress on the podcast project, and (iii) to serve as a segue into the group work period.
D.
Each week groups will be given a minimum of 25 minutes to discuss within their groups progress made over the prior week, issues arising, or problems encountered, as well as to develop a plan for the following week. The instructor will be available to help with questions or issues that arise during this time.
Attendance
You are expected to arrive on time.
Your participation, preparedness, engagement, and attendance is vital for your success in this class. I will keep track of attendance and your participation as much as 20% of your mark might based on in class participation (see ILP assignment).
Please let me know if you are unable to attend or if you will arrive late or leave class early.
Recordings:
You may NOT record the lectures without permission of the instructor and your classmates.
Copying and posting lecture material (slides, notes, assignments sheets) to the internet is strictly forbidden.
5
EVALUATION COMPONENTS
Podcast Team Project (50%)
You will collaboratively write and produce a 20-25 minutes podcast episode in a 3 students team. The podcast episode will be part of a podcast series on collateral consequences of punishment for the general public.
Objectives for this assignment:
•
Synthesize course material and external academic sources;
•
Explore alternative forms of engaging non-academic audiences and conveying academic research;
•
Learn and use audio recording and editing skills that may be useful beyond the classroom.
A) Podcast Proposal (5%)
After an in-class brainstorming session with the team (week 3), you will write a one-page proposal that includes: 1) a tentative title; 2) The specific theme of the episode; 3) Research Question; 4) Tentative argument; 5) Reflections: What is the purpose of the episode? Why is this topic important? How does this relate to invisible punishment?
B) Sources Analysis (13%)
Each student will select two scholarly research articles or book chapters related to the theme of the episode. These need to be external sources (i.e., not assigned course readings). For each source, you will write a summary (200 words) and a response (200 words) where you identify any issues, make comparisons, and ask questions. You will also consider how the source can inform the discussion of the topic and answers the RQ your team selected.
C) Podcast Layout and Script (10%)
The purpose of this assignment is to build on your previous work by adding concrete information and give a structure to your episode. You will describe the setup (e.g., speakers: host/s, guests; kind of interactions: Q&A, solo, interview) and structure the episode accordingly. You will also draft a script that sketches the episode conversations.
D) Podcast (18%)
In the final stage of this project, each team member will take on a specific role as part of the recording and post-production process:
1.
Voice (+ transcription and source attribution)
2.
Production (gathering equipment, recording, + episode description)
3.
Postproduction Editor (finding music/sound effects, editing, record check)
These tasks can be divided in different ways depending on how you plan to structure the episode. You will submit a 5 minutes audio teaser of your podcast on March 14th. The whole class will listen to the audio during the following class meeting and provide feedback. This teaser will not be graded.
E) Group meetings with instructor (2 x 2% each = 4%)
Each group will be asked to meet with the instructor at two different points in the semester, during Week 6 (Feb.12-16) and Week 9 (March 11-15). See calendar for alternative weeks. These meetings will be scheduled by appointment and can be held at Zoom. Meetings are an opportunity to talk through your podcast project with the instructor. The meetings are marked credit/no-credit.
More detailed instructions and suggestions will be provided by the course instructor for each assignment.
6
EVALUATION COMPONENTS
Individual Learning Plan (50%)
Every student has their own learning style, set of interests, and schedule. To reflect this, the course offers a few options from which you can choose to build your own individual learning plan. You can combine any of the following 4 options to reach 50%.
Option 1 - Reading Journal (4% per reading)
Each critical reflection (max 500 words) which must include:
I.
One to two reactions – What did you like or dislike about the content of the piece? And why?
II.
One to two keepers – What were the key ideas worth remembering and making note of? What did you take away the most from the readings?
III.
One to two annotated questions – What question(s) do you have for the author or after reading this piece? Why is this a good question?
IV.
One so what – Why does the topic/viewpoint matter? How does it contribute to our understanding of Invisible punishment?
Each reading entry is due before class (Monday at 11am) as you are expected to complete at least a first read of all assigned material before coming to class.
Option 2 – Reflections on Classes (2% per reflection)
Students will write a reflection on their own individual learning following class participation and discussion. These are a chance for you to reflect on the theme of the week, the connections between different ideas and readings, and what you’ve learned during the past week. Reflections need to be between 400 and 500 words. Think of it as a free writing exercise.
These entries must be submitted no later than 11.59pm on Thursday after class on which these reflections are based. The purpose of these portfolio entries is to monitor your own learning throughout the semester, but also explore further ideas that arise during class time.
Option 3 - AI output Evaluation (10%)
You will enter the prompt provided by the course instructor on an AI software of your choice. You will then write a 500 words response where you evaluate the AI generated response in light of the course readings and lectures. More instructions to follow.
Option 4:
In-Class participation (20%)
This class is held as a seminar, which means that we will spend significant portions of the class time discussing the assigned texts. The success of a seminar depends on everyone’s participation in the discussion of course material. It is critical that you read these texts ahead of class and come prepared to discuss the assigned texts.
Your class participation grade will be based on the following:
•
active participation in class discussions (e.g., asking and responding to questions, making a comment or an observation)
•
occasional in-class exercises/writing assignments
•
attendance (see course organization)
I will send an email to each student by week 5 to provide some feedback about their participation.
Everybody in this class will bring different life experiences and prior knowledge to the table. Sometimes there may be different opinions or perspectives on the subjects under discussion among class members. It is important that we all strive to collectively create an environment in which everybody feels comfortable to voice their opinion. Respecting each other's points of view is crucial for the participation in this course.
The maximum percentage for class participation is 20. This means that if you will miss a class, you won’t lose participation marks. There is no participation mark for our first meeting.
7
Individual Learning Plan (continued)
You will fill the following table with your Individual Learning Plan on Quercus by week 2 (January 15).
Type of Assignment
Weight
Week # or Topic
Deadline
In Class Participation
Reading Journal
Class Reflections
AI output Evaluation
n/a
Total
50%
You want to use this table to keep track of which assignments and deadlines you would like to meet.
While your plan can change mid-semester, it is a good idea to create a plan that best fits your schedule and interests and then stick with it. If any changes are made, please submit another table with the updates by Sunday February 25th.
NB: Make sure that the total of your ILP assignments will be 50%.
Example 1:
If you attend each seminar, you will already have 20% of your ILP. You will then mix the other assignment to reach 50%:
•
5 Reading entries (20%) + 5 reflections (10%)
•
5 Reading entries (20%) + AI evaluation (10%)
•
6 Reading entries (24%) + 3 reflections (6%)
•
3 Reading entries (12%) + 4 reflections (8%) + AI evaluation (10%)
If you miss a class, you will be able to submit a reflection for another week as they are both worth 2%.
Example 2: Class participation (16%) + 6 Reading Entries (24%) + AI evaluation (10%)
You cannot submit more than 50% and if do not reach the 50% you will lose marks.
8
EVALUATION COMPONENTS
Deadlines
All assignments will be submitted on Quercus.
Late Penalties
The penalty for late assignments is 3% a day. This includes weekends and holidays. Try your best to meet the deadlines because delays in submission will also mean delays in receiving feedback. Feedback is useful to improve your future submissions for the course.
*NB: The entries for the Reading Journal will NOT be accepted if submitted after the deadline. This assignment is designed so that you will independently engage with the reading before we discuss these topics during class time together. This will also allow us to have more meaningful group discussions. You also are given flexibility on when and what to work on as this is part of your Individual Learning Plan.
Assignments that are more than 7 days late will not be accepted.
Extensions
Unexpected events beyond our control may arise, and I will try to be as flexible as possible. It is an important skill to realize that you might need an extension and take responsibility for it by asking for one. Please send me an email. If you are registered with Accessibility Services and want to request an extension of time for an assignment, send me an email. Assignments Due Date Weight
Podcast Team Project:
50%
A.
Podcast proposal
Sunday, January 28th @6pm
5%
B.
Sources and Analysis
Thursday, February 8th @ 6pm
13%
C.
Layout and Script
Thursday, February 29th @ 6pm
10%
D.
Podcast
Teaser: Thursday, March 15th @6pm
Final: Sunday, March 31st @ 6pm
18%
E.
2 Group Meetings with Instructor
Week 5 or 6
Week 9 or 10
4% Individual Learning Plan: Choose from the following options: 50% Reading Journal Ongoing Due: 11am on Mondays* 4% per entry Reflections on class Ongoing Due: 6pm on Thursdays** 2% per entry AI Output Evaluation Sunday, February 18th @ 6pm 10% In Class Participation Ongoing 20% Total 100%
Deadline Clarifications
The entries for the Reading Journal and Reflections on class will be due throughout the semester. You choose when to submit them.
*I want you to work on the assigned readings before coming to class, this means that each entry for the Reading Journal is due at 11am on Monday on the week they correspond to.
For example, if you write a journal entry for Week 3, your deadline is Monday January 22nd at 11am. The lecture for week 3 starts on that day at 11am.
**Reflections on Classes are due on the same week you are writing about. If reflect on lecture 4 (Jan 29th), your deadline is Thursday (Feb 2st).
9
MISSED TERM WORK
Absence due to Illness
If you become ill (medical reason) and it affects your ability to do your academic work, you need to email the instructor and also declare your absence on the system (ACORN).
Students who miss the test or are late in submitting an assignment for other reasons, such as family or other personal reasons, should request their College Registrar to email the instructor.
If you get a concussion, break your hand, or suffer some other acute injury, you should register with Accessibility Services as soon as possible.
Absence Declaration via ACORN
Starting September 2023, students may only use the Absence Declaration once per academic term (e.g., the winter term) for a maximum period of 7 consecutive calendar days. See A&S Student Absences for additional information on eligibility.
According to University policy, the ACORN Absence Declaration Tool is intended to be used in the following circumstances:
o A health condition or injury (e.g., illness, serious physical harm, mental health issue, scheduled surgery)
o A personal or family emergency (e.g., unanticipated, and unavoidable familial incident beyond the student’s control)
o Bereavement (e.g., the death a student’s immediate family member or close friend)
The last day to drop the course is Monday March 11th
10
GRADING POLICIES
We will be using the standard university grading scale:
Each assignment handout will include instructions and a grading rubric.
Re-Marking of Term Work A student who believes that their written term work has a substantive error in grading may ask the instructor for re-evaluation. You have up to 2 weeks from the date of return of an item of term work or from the date the mark was made available to inquire about the mark and file an appeal. When asking for a regrade, the student must submit: (1) the original piece of work, and (2) a written explanation detailing why they believe the work was unfairly/incorrectly marked. The instructor must acknowledge receipt of a student request for remarking within 3-working days, and decisions should be provided in a timely fashion. If a re-marking is granted, the student must accept the resulting mark as the new mark, whether it goes up or down or remains the same. If an academic misconduct case is in progress for the piece of term work in question, a student may not appeal until the matter is resolved. If the student is not satisfied with this re-evaluation, he or she may appeal to the Associate Chair, Undergraduate (or equivalent) of the course’s sponsoring unit or program. An appeal of a mark beyond the instructor may only be made for an item worth at least 20% of the course mark. This appeal must occur no later than 2 weeks after the regrading by the instructor was returned to the student. Grade Meanings Refined Letter Grade Scale Numerical Scale of Marks Grade Point Value Excellent A + A A – 90 – 100% 85 – 89% 80 – 84% 4.0 4.0 3.7 Good B + B B – 77 – 79% 73 – 76% 70 – 72% 3.3 3.0 2.7 Adequate C + C C – 67 – 69% 63 – 66% 60 – 62% 2.3 2.0 1.7 Marginal D + D D – 57 – 59% 53 – 56% 50 – 52% 1.3 1.0 0.7 Inadequate F 0 – 49% 0.0
Marking of Group Work
The Source Analysis assignment part of the Team Podcast Project will be graded on an individual basis as each student will be reviewing 2 academic sources.
All other podcast assignments will be graded as follow:
The assignment will receive a group mark by the instructor. To account for each member contributions, each member of the team will submit a Peer Evaluation at the end of the semester. This rating will be considered when calculating the final mark.
I will show you the peer evaluation form during our first class meeting and explain how the grading will work.
Example:
Instructor mark for team project (excluding the source analysis assignment) = 75
Sum of Peer evaluation marks = +4
Student final mark = [75 + (75 +4)] / 2 = 76
11
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the University of Toronto is a strong signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, UofT treats cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously. The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and the process for addressing academic offences. Copying, plagiarizing, falsifying medical certificates, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student caught engaging in such activities will be referred to the Dean’s office for adjudication and punishment. Any student abetting or otherwise assisting in such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties. You are expected to cite sources in all written work and presentations. See these links for department citation formats and tips for how to use sources well:
• ASA Style Guide (here is a quick guide: link)
• https://advice.writing.utoronto.ca/using-sources/how-not-to-plagiarize/
Essay services You may see advertisements for services offering grammar help, essay editing and proofreading. Be very careful. If these services take a draft of your work and significantly change the content and/or language, you may be committing an academic offence (unauthorized assistance).
Generative AI Each assignment handout will include an AI statement that will describe whether and HOW you can use AI for that specific assignment. Students are allowed to use a Generative AI software to complete the AI Output Evaluation assignment. It is your choice on whether to complete this assignment and which Generative AI software you want to use. You must cite the AI tool appropriately.
Academic Integrity Verification
Sometimes, students will be required to submit their assignments to the University’s plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the University’s use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation web site (https://uoft.me/pdt-faq).
For some of your assignments, we will be using the software Ouriginal. It uses text matching technology as a method to uphold the University’s high academic integrity standards to detect any potential plagiarism. Ouriginal is integrated into Quercus. For the assignments set up to use Ouriginal, the software will review your paper when you upload it to Quercus. To learn more about Ouriginal’s privacy policy please review its Privacy Policy.
Students not wishing their assignment to be submitted through Ouriginal will not be assessed unless a student instead provides, along with their work, sufficient secondary material (e.g., reading notes, outlines of the paper, rough drafts of the final draft, etc.) to establish that the paper they submit is truly their own.
12
COURSE SCHEDULE
Topic, In Class Activities and Readings Assignments Week 1 Introduction: What is this course all about? In this first lecture, I will introduce myself and we will get to know each other. We will go over the syllabus and talk about expectations for the course. We will also critically consider the language we use when we refer to individuals with criminal records. In Class Activities:
• Icebreaker – getting to know each other
• Building Community Agreement
• Q&A session on course Required Readings: Harney, Brendan L., Mo Korchinski, Pam Young, Marnie Scow, Kathryn Jack, Paul Linsley, Claire Bodkin, Thomas D. Brothers, Michael Curtis, Peter Higgs, Tania Sawicki Mead, Aaron Hart, Debbie Kilroy, Matthew Bonn, and Sofia R. Bartlett. 2022. “It Is Time for Us All to Embrace Person-Centred Language for People in Prison and People Who Were Formerly in Prison.” International Journal of Drug Policy 99:103455. Read course Syllabus before class
Week 2
Invisible Punishment
What is invisible punishment? We will critically think about the term collateral consequences of punishment and how we should conceptualize these experiences. We will critically think about the term “collateral consequences of punishment” and start raising key questions for the course: does a convicted person deserve more punishment because previously convicted, charged or arrested? Are they perpetually to be treated as the usual suspects? why limiting life chances for people with convictions?
In Class Activities:
Skill Workshop:
•
Aims, Methods, Materials for Podcast
•
Reverse engineer podcast exercise
Team meeting:
•
Create Podcast Project Teams
•
Team contract
•
Assignment of team roles for the week
Required Readings: Travis, Jeremy. 2002. "Invisible Punishment: An Instrument of Social Exclusion” Pp 15-36 in From Invisible Punishment: The Collateral Consequences of Mass Imprisonment, edited by Marc Mauer and Meda Chesney-Lind. Kirk, David S. and Sara Wakefield. 2018. "Collateral consequences of punishment: A critical review and path forward." Annual Review of Criminology 1: 171-194.
JAN 8
10
JAN 15
10
13
Unlock. Personal Stories. Read 2 stories from the list available at this link. https://unlock.org.uk/personal-stories/ (both stories can be used for 1 reading journal entry)
Week 3 Criminal Records and Stigma How do sociologists understand and make sense of stigma? How does this relates to the collateral consequences of punishment and criminal records? What are criminal record checks? In Class Activities: Skill Workshop:
• Developing good questions Team meeting:
• discuss podcast ideas and questions
• start drafting your proposal Required Readings: Mustafa, Nageen, Paul Kingston, and Derek Beeston. 2013. “An exploration of the historical background of criminal record checking in the United Kingdom: From the eighteenth to the twenty-first century.” European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research 19: 15-30. Link, Bruce G. and Jo C. Phelan. 2001. “Conceptualizing Stigma.” Annual Review of Sociology 27:363–85. Podcast Team Assignment: Proposal DUE Sunday, January 28th @6pm
Week 4
Self and Stigma
We will continue our discussion on stigma by exploring how people manage it in their daily lives and how it impacts their relationship to the state, other institutions, and others.
In Class Activities:
Skill Workshop:
•
Identifying relevant sources
•
How to take notes and create an useful annotated bibliography.
Team meeting:
•
Discuss proposal feedback
•
Identify possible sources for next podcast assignment
Required Readings: Myrick, Amy. 2013. “Facing your criminal record: Expungement and the collateral problem of wrongfully represented self.” Law & Society Review 47(1):73-104.
Goodman, Philip. 2020. “’Work your story’: Selective voluntary disclosure, Stigma management, and narratives of seeking employment after prison.” Law and Social Inquiry 45(4): 1113-41.
JAN 22
10
JAN 29
10
14
Week 5 Invisible Punishment: American Exceptionalism or not? In this class, we will consider collateral consequences in a global perspective. Are criminal record check a global practice? Are the consequences of criminalization the same everywhere? In Class Activities:
• Discussion on Generative AI (in preparation of upcoming assignment) Skill Workshop:
• Integrating academic research into podcasts
• Listening to example Team meeting:
• Discuss sources retrieved and how to incorporate them Required Readings: ***NB: Students will be divided into 3 groups. Each will be assigned 2 of the following articles to read. *** Corda, Alessandro, Marti Rovira and Andrew Henley. 2023. “Collateral consequences of criminal records from the other side of the pond: How exceptional is American penal exceptionalism?” Criminology and Criminal Justice 23(4):528-548 Gastón, Leandro and Carlos Carnevale. 2023. “Criminal records and employment restrictions in Argentina: Between post-sentence discrimination and resistance strategies.” Criminology & Criminal Justice 23(4):608-628. Baffour, Frank D., Abraham P. Francis, Mark D. Chong, and Nonie Harris. 2023. “Criminal records and post-prison employment in Ghana: Formal and informal means of performing criminal background checks.” Criminology & Criminal Justice 23(4): 629-647. Backman, Christel. 2012. “Mandatory Criminal Checks in Sweden: Scandals and Function Creep.” Surveillance & Society 10(3/4):276-291. Jacobs, James B. and Elena Larrauri. 2012. “Are criminal convictions a public matter? The USA and Spain.” Punishment & Society 14(1):3–28. Naylor, Bronwyn and Georgina Heydon 2022. “Criminal records discrimination, and Aboriginal Communities: Enhancing Employment Opportunities” Journal of Criminology 55(4):514-531. Podcast Team Project: Source and Analysis DUE Thursday February 8th @ 6pm Group meeting with Instructor #1 (this or next week)
Week 6
Multiplying of Barriers: Housing, Employment and Health
During this meeting, we will discuss more closely some of the consequences people experience when accessing, searching, and maintaining housing, employment and health and pay attention to their intersection.
In Class Activities:
Skill Workshop:
•
Mapping out presentations and ideas: How to tell a story in a podcast.
•
Structure of a podcast
Team meeting:
•
chat about feedback received
•
sketch a map / layout of your podcast
Group meeting with Instructor
#1
(this or last week)
ILP:
AI evaluation
DUE Sunday February 18th @ 6pm
FEB 5
FEB 12
15
Required Readings and Materials:
Podacst: Code for America: The impact of a criminal record on housing. https://on.soundcloud.com/jiKar
Sheppard, Amy and Rosemary Ricciardelli. 2020. “Employment after imprisonment: Navigating conditions of precarity and stigma.” European Journal of Probation 12(1): 34-52.
READING WEEK – NO CLASS!
Week 7
Civil Rights, Disenfranchisement and Citizenship
In Class Activities:
Skill Workshop:
•
checking in: answering questions and concerns raised so far
Team meeting:
•
What are the questions you are exploring?
•
What are the concerns you still have?
Required Readings:
Miller, Reuben J. and Forrest Stuart. 2017. “Carceral Citizenship: Race, Rights and Responsibility in the Age of Mass Supervision.” Theoretical Criminology 21(4): 532-548. Behan, Cormac. 2022. "No longer a ‘collateral consequence’: Imprisonment and the reframing of citizenship." European Journal of Criminology 19(6): 1283-1303. Smiley, Calvin John. 2023. Purgatory Citizenship: Reentry, Race and Abolition. Berkeley: University of California Press (excerpts)
Podcast Team Project: Layout and Script
DUE Thursday February 29th @ 6pm Week 8 Intersecting Identities and the Consequences of Criminalization We will consider how the intersection of gender, race, class, sexuality and more impact the experiences people have after coming into contact with the CJS. In Class Activities: Skill Workshop:
• Topic and Angle Shifting in Podcast Team meeting: Transforming written language into recorded language
• How do you modify your script into spoken language?
• Assigning roles for podcast recording
• Perform your script (1 minute) Required Readings: Grace, Anita. 2022. “’Get to know me, not the inmate’: Women’s management of the stigma of criminal records.” British Journal of Criminology 62(1):73-89. Gurusami, Susila. 2017. “Working for Redemption: Formerly Incarcerated Black Women and Punishment in the Labor Market.” Gender & Society 31 (4):433-56. Henry, Felicia A. 2023. “Racialized, Sexualized, and Criminalized: Carceral Citizenship of Black Women.” Critical Criminology
FEB 19
FEB 26
MAR 4 46
16
Week 9
Moving beyond the single: Families, Children and Communities
In Class Activities:
Skill Workshop:
•
Learning about production and editing (Audacity)
Team meeting:
•
Brainstorming sounds and effects
Required Readings: Condry, Rachel and Shona Minson. 2021. “Conceptualizing the effects of imprisonment on families: Collateral consequences, secondary punishment, or symbiotic harms?” Theoretical Criminology 25(4):540-558. Haney, Lynne. 2022. “Introduction: From Deadbeat to Deadbroke” Pp1-24 in Prisons of Debt: The Afterlife of Incarcerated Fathers Berkeley: University of California Press.
Podcast Team Project: 5 minutes teaser
DUE Thursday March 14th
@ 6pm
Group meeting with Instructor #2
(this or next week) Week 10 The consequences of criminalization at the Border How is the movement of people with criminal records affected? We will consider deportation and immigration policies for people with criminal records. In Class Activities: Skill Workshop:
• Listen to other teams’ teaser and provide Post-it feedback Team meeting:
• What’s going to change and why? Required Readings: Dao, Lili. 2023. “Mitigating and Bordering: The Dual Nature of Canadian Collateral Consequences of Conviction.” Criminology & Criminal Justice 23(4):588–607. McNeill, Henrietta. 2023. “Deportation as a Neo-colonial Act: how deporting state influence extends beyond the border.” Political Geography 102 Group meeting with Instructor #2 (this or last week)
Week 11
Criminal Record Management and Relief
In this class, we will identify and describe a variety of approaches, policies and legislation used across the globe to manage criminal records. We will critically consider their implications and the ideas/discourses behind such logics and practices.
In Class Activities: TBD
Required Readings: McAleese, Samantha. 2017. “Changes to Canada’s Pardon Program and the Impact on Finding Employment.” Pp. 83–104 in After prison: navigating employment and reintegration., edited by R. Ricciardelli and A. Peters. Waterloo, ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Podcast Team Project: Podcast
DUE Sunday March 31st
@ 6pm
MAR 11 46
MAR 18
MAR 25
17
Zand-Kurtovic, Elina van ’t, and Miranda Boone. 2023. “Privacy, promotionalism and the proliferation of state-performed criminal record screening in the Netherlands: How a restrictive legal framework can still result in a steep increase of criminal background checks.” Criminology & Criminal Justice 23(4):549-567.
Week 12 Resisting Criminal Records and Envisioning Alternatives In Class Activities:
• End of term reflection
• Fill Peer Evaluation Forms (towards Podcast grade)
• Fill Course Evaluations Weis, Valeria V. and Julieta Sosa. 2021. “Contesting the collateral damages of imprisonment from below.” Pp. 184-197 in Contesting Carceral Logic, edited by M Coyle and M Nagel. Routledge. Henley, Andrew. 2019. “Alternative approaches to criminal records.” Justice Alternatives. – from page 324 onwards
APR 1
18
RESOURCES
Accessibility Needs
The University will strive to provide support for and facilitate the accommodation of individuals with disabilities so that all may share the same level of access to opportunities, participate in the full range of activities that the University offers, and achieve their full potential as members of the University community.
If you require accommodations for a disability, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible. Visit http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/as
Mental Health and Wellness It is not uncommon for university students to experience a range of health and mental health issues that may result in barriers to achieving their academic goals. The University of Toronto offers a wide range of services that may be of assistance. You are encouraged to seek out these resources early and often.
On Campus:
•
Your college Registrar’s Office, and /or Dean of Students’ Office
•
Student Life - https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/task/support-when-you-feel-distressed/
•
Health and Wellness Centre - https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/department/health-wellness/
•
https://mentalhealth.utoronto.ca/
•
Campus Police: 416-978-2222
Off-Campus:
•
Good2Talk - a post-secondary (24/7) helpline (1-866-925-5454)
•
U of T Telus Health Student Support – 24/7 culturally competent mental health and counselling service in 146 languages for all U of T students. (1-844-451-9700)
Student Academic Success
If you want to explore a range of supports, expand your academic skills (e.g. learning how to learn) and connect with a peer mentor or learning strategist, check this out: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/department/academic-success/
See also the First Nations House Indigenous Student Services and the Centre for International Experience.
Writing Centre
The writing centre at UofT offers a range of services to improve your writing. I used this help when I was an undergrad and found the really useful. Check the following links for further information.
•
Overview of services: https://writing.utoronto.ca/writing-centres/arts-and-science/
•
Advice on writing: https://advice.writing.utoronto.ca/
•
Workshops (Zoom or in person): https://writing.utoronto.ca/writing-plus/fall-workshops/
Library
The UofT library provides access to a vast collection of online and print resources. Various services are available to students, including borrowing, interlibrary loans, online references, research help, laptop loans. Check some of their support here: https://onesearch.library.utoronto.ca/studying-and-learning.