Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 1
PSY100Y5F – Introduction to Psychology Monday to Thursday 12:00pm – 2:00pm in Room CC 1140 (CCT Building)
Contact Information
Lecture Instructor
Dr. Dax Urbszat
Office: DH 4008
Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday 11am - 12
E-mail: dax.urbszat@utoronto.ca
Lab Instructor
Dr. Jeff Graham
Office: DH 2046 in Deerfield Hall
Office Hours: By appointment jeffrey.graham@utoronto.ca
PSY100Y5 Student Support
PUMP Room: Deerfield Hall Room 2039
Ph: 905-828 5409
Email: psyugassistant.utm@utoronto.ca
Lecture Meeting Time and Location
Monday - Thursday 12:00pm – 2:00pm
Room: CC 1140
Laboratory Component
Tues and Wed 10-12 (PRA0101) or 2-4 (PRA0102)
Location: Room DH 2050 in Deerfield Hall
Please visit the PSYCH Lab Info in the Quercus portal
Recommended Materials
Weiten, W. & McCann, T. (2018). Psychology: Themes and Variations (Fifth Canadian Edition), Belmont, Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Alloway, T., Wilson, G., and Graham, J. (2012). Sniffy the Virtual Rat: Lite version 3.0. Belmont, Wadsworth/Thomson Learning. (bundled with Textbook)
Adaptrack Student License Key (2018), Psychology Labs, 2nd Edition. (bundled with Textbook)
Required Reading Materials
DeckChair Student License Key (2019). PSY100 Computer Labs.
(both LICENCE KEYS are bundled with text - also sold separately at bookstore checkout)
Course Webpages
The website associated with this course is accessible via http://q.utoronto.ca
Note: You don't need to create a new login for Canvas; it already knows who you are. You just need your UTORid and password. This is the same login that gets you onto the wireless network with your laptop, and the same one that you use to check your email. If you're confused about your UTORid or don't remember your password, go to: https://www.utorid.utoronto.ca/
In order to access course material, monitor course information, and view your grades you must log into Canvas. If you have any general questions regarding Canvas, please visit the following help site:
https://library.utm.utoronto.ca/faculty/canvas
Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 2
PsychED Participation for Course Credit
PsychED is for PSY100 students to receive course credit for completion of faculty's research experiments. https://app.utm.utoronto.ca/experiments-signup Participation in 6 hours of experiments (3 per term) or completion of 6 substitute assignments is worth a total of 4% of the PSY100 final grade. Each hour-long experiment would be worth 0.67% and a 30-minute experiment would be worth 0.33% of your final grade. Some experiments may be longer than an hour (e.g. 1.5, 2 or 3 hours). The maximum number of credit a student may earn is 4%. There is no monetary payment for participation. Students wishing NOT to participate in PsychED experiments can complete up to six (6) substitute assignments for credit. Click on Substitute Assignment for instruction. Students should check early and often to make sure they can sign up for 6 hours in total, 3 hours in EACH TERM.
Questions should be directed to: psyched.utm@utoronto.ca
Course Evaluation
Term tests - lecture component (21%)
6 tests, short answers
Term tests - textbook component (21%)
6 tests, 30 multiple choice questions each
Lab work (21%)
2 lab tests @ 6% each; lab report 4%;
lab completion credits 5%
Experiments (4%)
Participation in 6 hours of experiments (3 per term) or completion of substitute assignments
Final Exam (33%)
160 multiple choice questions,
based on the textbook
IMPORTANT COURSE POLICIES **PLEASE READ**
Missed Test Special Consideration Request Process Students who miss a test due to circumstances beyond their control (e.g. illness or an accident) can request that the Department grant them special consideration. Students must present their case to the Department (NOT the Instructor) by submitting a request via the online Special Consideration Request form at: https://utmapp.utm.utoronto.ca/SpecialRequest.
Students are to submit original supporting documentation (e.g., medical certificates, Verification of Extenuating Circumstances, etc.) to the Psychology Academic Counselor or drop it in the drop box located outside the Psychology office, Deerfield Hall, 4th Floor. Students have up-to one week from the date of the missed test to submit request. Late submissions will NOT be considered without a letter of explanation specifying and documenting the reasons for the lateness.
Medical certificates or physician’s notes must be completed by the Physician and MUST include the statement "This Student [name] was unable to write the test on [date(s)] for medical reasons". This documentation must show that the physician was consulted within one the day of the missed term test. A statement merely acknowledging a report of illness made by the student to the physician is NOT acceptable. For further information on this procedure please see: http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/psychology/undergraduate-studies/missed-testslate-submissions
If you missed your test/assignment deadline for a reason connected to your registered disability, please be advised that the department will accept documentation supplied by the UTM AccessAbility Resource Centre.
Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 3
IMPORTANT: The Department of Psychology verifies the authenticity of medical certificates by contacting medical offices. Students are NOT to make any changes or alteration to completed medical certificates. Students who submit forged or altered documentation are subject to severe academic penalties.
Extension of Time Special Consideration Request Process Students who seek to be granted more time to complete their term work beyond the due date without penalty, owing to circumstances beyond their control (e.g., illness, or an accident), must do so by submitting a request directly to the Instructor for the period up to and including the last day of the term. The decision as to whether or not to apply a penalty for the specified period rests with the Instructor.
Students who seek to be granted more time to complete term work beyond the last day of the term must submit their request directly to the Department. This request covers the period following the last day of classes and ends the last day of the exam period. This is done by submitting a request via the online Special Consideration Request form at https://utmapp.utm.utoronto.ca/SpecialRequest.
You are advised to seek advising by the departmental Undergraduate Counsellor prior to the deadline.
Original supporting documentation (e.g., medical certificates, accident reports, etc.) must be submitted to the Psychology Academic Counselor or dropped off in the drop box located outside the Psychology office Deerfield Hall, 4th Floor. Students are expected to submit requests to the Department before the last day of the term, unless demonstrably serious reasons prevent them from doing so. In the event of an illness, medical certificates or doctor’s notes must confirm that student was ill on the due date of the assignment (for a one-day extension). For a longer extension, documentation must specify the full duration during which academic work could not be carried out.
For extensions of time beyond the examination period you must submit a petition through the Office of the Registrar. http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/registrar/current-students/petitions
Penalties for Lateness A penalty of 10% per calendar day (i.e., including week-ends and holidays, during which students are not able to submit term work) up to and including the last day of classes, will be applied by the Instructor. After the last day of classes, the penalty of 10% per calendar day will be applied by the Undergraduate Counsellor on behalf of the Department. No penalty will be assigned if request for special consideration, described above, was successful.
Academic Guidelines It is your responsibility to ensure that you have met all prerequisites listed in the UTM Calendar for this course. If you lack any prerequisites you WILL BE REMOVED from the course up until the last day to add a course. Further information about academic regulations, course withdrawal dates and credits can be found in the University of Toronto Mississauga Calendar at: http://www.erin.utoronto.ca/regcal/.
You are encouraged to read this material. If you run into trouble and need advice about studying, preparing for exams, note taking or time management, free workshops and advice are available from the Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre at 905-828-5406.
AccessAbility Services Students requiring academic accommodations for learning, physical, sensory, or mental health disabilities or medical conditions should contact the AccessAbility Office (2037B Davis Building), 905-828-3847. http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/accessability/
Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 4
Academic Honesty and Plagiarism Honesty and fairness are considered fundamental to the university's mission, and, as a result, all those who violate those principles are dealt with as if they were damaging the integrity of the university itself. When students are suspected of cheating or a similar academic offence, they are typically surprised at how formally and seriously the matter is dealt with -- and how severe the consequences can be if it is determined that cheating did occur. The University of Toronto treats cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously. Please take the time to review the Academic Integrity website: http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/academic-integrity/students.
• Common trends in academic offences:
• Plagiarizing/concocted references
• Collaboration/unauthorized assistance
• Purchasing work
• Recycling work - "double-dipping"
• Resubmitting of altered work for re-grading
• Electronic devices (cell phones) or any unauthorized aids
• Altering medical certificates and UofT documents
From the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: “It shall be an offence for a student to knowingly: represent as one's own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in any academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work, i.e. to commit plagiarism. Wherever in the Code an offence is described as depending on "knowing”, the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.” All students must refer to this website to obtain information on what constitutes plagiarism. http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/using-sources/how-not-to-plagiarize.
If questions arise after reading the material on the website, consult your instructor.
Plagiarism will not be tolerated.
Equity Statement
The University of Toronto is committed to equity and respect for diversity. All members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect. As a course instructor, I will neither condone nor tolerate behaviour that undermines the dignity or self-esteem of any individual in this course and wish to be alerted to any attempt to create an intimidating or hostile environment. It is our collective responsibility to create a space that is inclusive and welcomes discussion. Discrimination, harassment and hate speech will not be tolerated. If you have any questions, comments, or concerns you may contact the UTM Equity and Diversity officer at edo.utm@utoronto.ca or the University of Toronto Mississauga Students’ Union Vice President Equity at vpequity@utmsu.ca.
Academic Rights
You, as a student at UTM, have the right to:
- Receive a syllabus by the first day of class.
- Rely upon a syllabus once a course is started. An instructor may only change marks’ assignments by following the University Assessment and Grading Practices Policy provision 1.3.
- Refuse to use turnitin.com (you must be offered an alternative form of submission).
- Have access to your instructor for consultation during a course or follow up with the department chair if the instructor is unavailable.
- Ask the person who marked your term work for a re-evaluation if you feel it was not fairly graded.
Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 5
You have up to one month from the date of return of the item to inquire about the mark. If you are not satisfied with a re-evaluation, you may appeal to the instructor in charge of the course if the instructor did not mark the work. If your work is remarked, you must accept the resulting mark. You may only appeal a mark beyond the instructor if the term work was worth at least 20% of the course mark.
- Receive at least one significant mark (15% for H courses, 25% for Y courses) before the last day you can drop a course for H courses, and the last day of classes in the first week of January for Y courses taught in the Fall/Winter terms.
- Submit handwritten essays so long as they are neatly written.
- Have no assignment worth 100% of your final grade.
- Not have a term test worth 25% or more in the last two weeks of class.
- Retain intellectual property rights to your research.
- Receive all your assignments once graded.
- View your final exams. To see a final exam, you must submit an online Exam Reproduction Request within 6 months of the exam. There is a small non-refundable fee.
- Privacy of your final grades.
- Arrange for representation from Downtown Legal Services (DLS), a representative from the UTM Students’ Union (UTMSU), and/or other forms of support if you are charged with an academic offence.
Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 6
PSY100 LECTURE SCHEDULE
Week 1 May 6 - Ch1: Introduction May 7 - Ch2: Research Methods May 8 - Ch3: Neuroanatomy May 9 - TEST (Chapters 1, 2 & 3) Week 2 May 13 - Ch4: Sensation & Perception
May 14 - Ch5: Consciousness May 15 - Ch6: Learning May 16 - TEST (Chapters 4, 5 & 6)
Week 3 May 20 - Ch7: Cognition (Victoria Day : NO LECTURE) May 21 - Ch8: Language May 22 - Ch9: Intelligence May 23 - TEST (Chapters 7, 8 & 9) AND Laboratory Test
Week 4 May 27 - Ch10: Motivation and Emotion May 28 - Ch11: Human Development May 29 - Ch12: Personality May 30 - TEST (Chapters 10, 11, & 12) Week 5 June 3 - Ch13: Social Psychology June 4 - Ch13 & 14: Social Psychology & Health June 5 - Ch14: Health Psychology June 6 - TEST (Chapters 13 & 14)
Week 6 June 10 - Ch15: Psychological Disorders June 11 - Ch15 & 16: Psychological Disorders & treatment June 12 - Ch16: Treatment of Disorders June 13 - TEST (Chapters 15 & 16) AND Laboratory Test
There will be 6 term testing sessions. On tests 3 and 6, in addition to textbook and lecture questions, your tests will include short answer questions based on labs. Make-ups are scheduled ONLY for missed lab tests. All tests are conducted during your regular PSY100Y5F class times. Test duration for tests 1, 2, 4 and 5 is 50 minutes. Test duration for tests 3 and 6 is 100 minutes.
Laboratory Component
All summer PSY100 students must be enrolled in one of the two lab sections that meet Tuesdays and Wednesdays (PRA0101 10-12am and PRA0102 2-4pm). During each of the ten two-hour Labs, there will be an experiment or simulation assignment that must be completed for attendance credits. Each completed lab is worth .5% for a total 5%. If you miss your lab you must attend one of the other sections on the same day. There are no make-up labs - only the sections that are now scheduled. If you are in the last scheduled lab, and you miss it, there is no way to make up that credit.
To participate and get credit for work done in the computer labs, all students must arrive at their scheduled lab times with their DeckChair Student License key registered (it is bundled with the textbook, or available as a stand-alone in the bookstore). Purchase the DeckChair and AdapTrack software licenses through the UTM Campus Bookstore before labs begin. ONLY the DeckChair Tutor software is MANDATORY for lab participation.
PLEASE NOTE - the PSY100 Computer Lab requires that you have a DeckChair Tutor license (i.e., registered using the access card) when you attend each of the labs. You will not be able to participate if you do not have an account. The Adaptrack Student License for the PSY100 labs is recommended (and bundled with the textbook package). You will need to login to DeckChair Tutor during each lab.
The AdapTrack software will be very useful as a study guide for labs, and for your research project in the second term. Register your DeckChair and AdapTrack accounts before labs begin.
Summer 2019 - Department of Psychology Page 7
PSY100 LAB SCHEDULE
May
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
6th
7th
The Scientific Method
8th
Illusions & Psychophysics
9th
Lecture test 1
13th
14th
Dream Analysis
15th
SNIFFY
Operant Conditioning
16st
Lecture test 2
PsycInfo
Library assignment
20st
********
VICTORIA
HOLIDAY
*********
21nd
Recall and Recognition Memory
22rd
(NO LABS)
23th
Lecture test 3
LAB TEST 1
27th
28th
LAB REPORT
WORKSHOP
29th
Cognitive
STROOP TASK
30st
Lecture test 4
APA Style
Library assignment
JUNE
3th
Lab Report Due
4th
Positive
Psychology
5th
Social
Psychology
6th
Lecture test 5
10th
11th
Self Esteem and Correlations
12th
(NO LABS)
13th
Lecture test 6
LAB TEST 2