Type Description Due Date Weight
Assignment Homework, in-class assignments, essay drafts On-going 25%
Assignment First essay - final version 2018-02-26 15%
Assignment Second essay - final version 2018-04-02 15%
Presentations Oral presentations - to be held in March On-going 10%
Final Exam Cummulative TBA 35%
Total 100%
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCES
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
MAT392H5S LEC0101
Ideas of Mathematics
Course Outline - Winter 2018
Class Location & Time Tue, 02:00 PM - 03:00 PM IB 385
Thu, 11:00 AM - 01:00 PM DH 4001
Instructor Yael Karshon
Office Location DH 3024
Office Hours Tuesdays 3:10-4:00 pm or by appointment
Telephone (905) 828-3857
E-mail Address yael.karshon@utoronto.ca
Course Web Site http://www.math.toronto.edu/karshon/courses/mat392/
Teaching Assistant Özgür Esentepe
E-mail Address ozgur.esentepe@mail.utoronto.ca
Course Description
This is a one-term course to give students extensive practice in the writing of mathematics. The format will be to study excellent
expositions of important ideas of mathematics and then to assign short writing assignments based on them. [36L, 12T]
Prerequisite: Completion of the second-year requirements for the Major and Specialists Programs in Mathematical Sciences.
Exclusion: MATC90H3 (SCI)
Distribution Requirement: SCI
Students who lack a pre/co-requisite can be removed at any time unless they have received an explicit waiver from the department.
The waiver form can be downloaded from here.
Textbooks and Other Materials
Handouts or digital copies will be supplied as needed.
Assessment and Deadlines
More Details for Assessment and Deadlines
Draft of first essay is due Thu Feb 1.
Draft of second essay is due Mon Mar 12.
Penalties for Lateness
Late homework will not be accepted.
MAT392H5S - Karshon, Yael Page 1 of 2
Procedures and Rules
Missed Term Work
To request special consideration, bring supporting documentation to the instructor in person during office hours at least one week in
advance.
In case of illness or injury, bring a UTM Verification of Illness or Injury form to the instructor within one week of the missed work.
Missed Final Exam
Students who cannot write a final examination due to illness or other serious causes must file an online petition within 72 hours of
the missed examination. Original supporting documentation must also be submitted to the Office of the Registrar within 72 hours
of the missed exam. Late petitions will NOT be considered. If illness is cited as the reason for a deferred exam request, a U of T
Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form must show that you were examined and diagnosed at the time of illness and on the
date of the exam, or by the day after at the latest. Students must also record their absence on ACORN on the day of the missed
exam or by the day after at the latest. Upon approval of a deferred exam request, a non-refundable fee of $70 is required for each
examination approved.
Academic Integrity
Honesty and fairness are fundamental to the University of Toronto’s mission. Plagiarism is a form of academic fraud and is treated
very seriously. The work that you submit must be your own and cannot contain anyone elses work or ideas without proper
attribution. You are expected to read the handout How not to plagiarize (http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/using-sources/hownot-
to-plagiarize) and to be familiar with the Code of behaviour on academic matters, which is linked from the UTM calendar under
the link Codes and policies.
Final Exam Information
Duration: 3 hours
Aids Permitted: None
Additional Information
Emails: write from a U of T email account; include an informative subject line including "MAT392".
Last Date to drop course from Academic Record and GPA is March 14, 2018.
MAT392H5S - Karshon, Yael Page 2 of 2