DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
SOC465H5S LEC0101
Climate Change and Society
Course Outline - Winter 2024
Class Location & Time Mon, 03:00 PM - 05:00 PM DH 2070
Instructor Zaheer Baber
Office Location MN6020
Office Hours Mondays 5-6pm in person or via Zoom
E-mail Address zaheer.baber@utoronto.ca
Course Web Site https://q.utoronto.ca
Teaching Assistant Brody Trottier
E-mail Address brody.trottier@mail.utoronto.ca
Course Description
In this course a variety of classical and contemporary sociological perspectives will be deployed to understand the social context,
factors and consequences of climate change. Possible topics include the political economy of the environment, environmental
refugees, environmental movements, media representations of climate change, the social context and consequences of fracking, the
politics of global protocols on carbon emissions, climate justice and social inequality, etc. [24L]
Prerequisite: (SOC205H5 or SOC231H5) and SOC221H5 and SOC222H5 and 1.0 SOC credit at the 300 level (SSc)
Distribution Requirement: SSc
It is your responsibility to ensure that the prerequisites for this course have been met. Students without the prerequisites can be
removed at any time. No waivers will be granted.
Detailed Course Description
In this course, a sociological understanding of one of the most complex and challenging issues confronting humanity will be
examined from a variety of theoretical perspectives. Using the general sociological framework of structure/ideology/culture/agency
students will explore the many dimensions of the origins and consequences of climate change with the goal of acquiring a
sociologically rigorous understanding of the complexities of the multidimensional society-nature relationship. The range of topics
covered include classical and contemporary theoretical perspectives on the environment; the science of climate change and public
understandings of it; climate change and its relationship to forms global social inequalities, gender and social conflicts; the varied
institutional and collective responses such as the Rio Earth Summit, the Montreal Accords, the Kyoto Protocol, the Copenhagen
Accord, the Paris Agreement, the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), COP etc. as well as a number of social
movements that seek to understand, confront and tackle the global challenge of climate change will be discussed. If you are
expecting some discussion about whether or not climate change is happening, this is probably not the course for you. There
will be no discussion of this issue in the class or lectures.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of the course, students should be able to acquire and appreciate a sociologically rigorous understanding and appreciation
of the origins, possible consequences and potential future trajectories of climate change. They will learn about the diversity of
theoretical sociological perspectives - classical and contemporary - on the social dimensions of the environment in general and
climate change in particular. They will also be able to apply the staple sociological concepts of structure, agency, ideology, culture,
class, gender, race, power, social inequality, social movements and resistance to make sense of one of the biggest challenges
confronting planet earth.
Textbooks and Other Materials
All the text-books and other material listed below are available online via the University of Toronto Library System. You
don't have to buy any books! We will be using select chapters and selections from the following texts:
Riley E. Dunlap and Richard J. Brulle (eds.) Climate Change and Society: Sociological Perspectives (Oxford University Press,
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 1 of 13
Type Description Due Date Weight
Term Test Two Essay Questions 2024-02-05 30%
Assignment Review Essay on Patel and Moore's book 2024-02-26 30%
Assignment Response paper 2024-03-11 5%
Assignment Response paper 2024-03-18 10%
Term Test Two Essays and a short answer question 2024-04-01 25%
Total 100%
2015)
Constance Lever-Tracey (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of Climate Change and Society (Routledge, 2010)
John Dryzek, Richard Norgaard and David Schlosberg (eds) The Oxford Handbook on Climate Change and Society (Oxford
University Press, 2012)
We will be using the Patel and Moore book below for the review-essay assignment. The entire book is available online via the U of
T Library System. If you cannot access it, please let me know.
Raj Patel and Jason W. Moore, A History of the World in Seven Cheap Things: A Guide to Capitalism, Nature and the Future of the
Planet (University of California Press, 2018; Available online full text, via the Robarts Library System)
Naomi Klein, Documentary: This Changes Everything: Capitalism and Climate Change on Youtube
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dgINY9PL0hg)
"Inside Extinction Rebellion" on Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DdZAvdPSU_Q&t=589s
"Living in the Time of Dying" on Youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UftuDAkwM3I&t=2s
Documentary on Vimeo: Hands-On:Women:Climate Change (https://vimeo.com/88965203)
Journal Articles for each topic, specified on the course outline. Available on online via Robarts Library
Very brief, no more than two pages long relevant online articles and commentaries on contemporary issues to be provided later.
Every attempt will be made to follow this list, but it is subject to change at the discretion of the instructor.
Evaluation Components
You should receive at least one significant mark (15%) before the last day you can drop a course without academic penalty.
Please note that Grades in Quercus gives early access to preliminary grades; it does not represent your official final marks. For final
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 2 of 13
grades logon to ACORN.
Grading
Term Tests:
First Test: 14 February, 2019; Two essay questions based on the topics covered to date; two hours; no aids allowed
Second Test: 4th April, 2019; Two essay and some short-answer questions based on topics covered after the first test; two hours
duration; no aids allowed.
Research Paper:
The term paper for this course will be a review-essay on Raj Patel and Jason W. Moore, A History of the World in Seven Cheap
Things: A Guide to Capitalism, Nature and the Future of the Planet (University of California Press, 2018; Available online full
text, via the Robarts Library System). Unlike a "book-review" where the key arguments of a book are summarized and some
critical comments are provided, a "review-essay" provides an overall summary and an in-depth and detailed engagement with
selected ideas and arguments of the book. A review-essay also contextualizes the authors' arguments with other articles, books or
discussions of similar issues. You are expected to do some independent research on the issues raised by the author and incorporate
their findings in your discussion of the book's key arguments. You will use THREE references which maybe journal articles or
web-based articles on the issue of climate change. More details will be provided in class and via email.
The key requirements of the research paper assignments are:
1.The review-essay should be about 1500 words.
2. You need to focus on the Introduction and any TWO other chapters of your choice.
3. The discussion should incorporate 3 references from articles, books or web-based discussions climate change.
4. A proper bibliography should be included. For citations, the American Sociological Association format should be used (please
search for it on the web)
5. The review-essay should have a clear argument or a related set of arguments.
6. Abbreviations, slang etc. should be avoided.
7. Marks will be deducted for spelling mistakes and typographical errors. Please proof-read your paper carefully before submission.
The key requirements of the research paper assignments are:
1. The review-essay should be about 1500 words.
2. The discussion should incorporate 3 references from articles, books or web-based discussions climate change.
3. A proper bibliography should be included. For citations, the American Sociological Association format should be used (please
search for it on the web)
4. The review-essay should have a clear argument or related arguments.
5. Abbreviations, slang etc. should be avoided.
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 3 of 13
6. Marks will be deducted for spelling mistakes and typographical errors. Please proof-read your paper carefully before submission.
Response Papers:
Response Papers:
The response papers are based on the documentary This Changes Everything (based on Naomi Klein's book with the same title)
and "Living in the Time of Tying" - all available on Youtube. These are two separate response papers. The first response paper on
"Living in a Time of Dying" is expected between 300-500 words. The second response paper is expected to be between 700-100
words. The first paragraph should outline the key argument or set of arguments/points made in the documentaries. Then
one paragraph discussing any issue/s that seem important to you. And a third paragraph that represents your response to the issues
you have chosen to highlight framed by questions such as: Does the documentary make a convincing argument or not? What are the
reasons that make it a compelling or a not so compelling documentary?
1. The response papers are due on 11 March and 18 March 2024.
2. Please feel free to email me if you have any questions or clarifications about the response papers.
Grading Policies/Rubric
For a course based on a critical sociological framework, a rigid rubric is not feasible. The evaluation for this course is based on the
overall quality of the answers and the research paper as reflected in research, analytical and writing skills. The research paper
should be written in a formal style and should not have any abbreviations, slangs, emoticons or digital language in the main text.
You must carefully proofread your paper for typographical errors before submitting the paper. You will lose marks for
typographical errors, the use of abbreviations in the main text and for spelling mistakes. The overall grading criteria for the research
paper and the test answers are listed below. These are broad guidelines and the actual grade will depend on the specificities of
particular papers/tests.
A: Superior comprehension of the course readings and lectures, combined with outstanding critical, analytical and writing skills
B. Comprehension of the course readings and lectures, some evidence of critical analytical skills, weak writing skills
C. Comprehension of course readings and lectures, weak analytical and writing skills
D. Some comprehension of course readings and lectures, no critical engagement with the substance of the course and poor writing
skills.
F. Little evidence of meaningful engagement with the course material, weak analytical skills, poor writing skills; outstanding
writing skills but no engagement with the course material.
Class/Seminar Format
This is a lecture course but class discussions are welcome. I will try my best to provoke class discussions.
Procedures and Rules
Missed Academic Obligations
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 4 of 13
Students who miss an academic obligation during the term (i.e., quiz, test, assignment) may use the ACORN absence declaration
tool (AD) to record an absence in one or more courses. This option may be used once per term for a single absence period of
up to seven consecutive days in one or more courses. The declaration period must include the day of declaration and may
include past and/or future dates, for a total of up to seven calendar days. Use of the ACORN AD does not require documentation. It
remains the student's responsibility to initiate the process of seeking academic consideration – such as a make-up test,
assignment extension – by following the instructions listed below, under "Seeking Academic Consideration for a Missed Academic
Obligation."
Before a student declares an absence on ACORN for a test or quiz, they should review the syllabus closely as the instructor may
have exempted that test or quiz from the ACORN AD. If there is an instructor exemption for that test or quiz, you are required to
submit documentation when seeking academic consideration for the test or quiz and you should not use ACORN to declare the
absence for that test or quiz.
If a student misses an academic obligation but has already used the ACORN AD during that term, they will be required to submit
documentation when seeking academic consideration. It is the student's responsibility to initiate the process of seeking academic
consideration – such as a make-up test, assignment extension – by following the instructions listed below, under "Seeking
Academic Consideration for a Missed Academic Obligation."
If you are facing circumstances that make securing documentation difficult, please contact your instructor and/or our program
counsellor directly to discuss.
Reasons for temporary absences include illness, injury, and other unplanned circumstances beyond a student's control (such as
court subpoena, funeral, car accident). Reasons such as holidays, pre-purchased plane tickets, family plans, lack of test/assignment
preparation, conflicting deadlines, late course registration, technology failure, and traffic- or weather-related incidents are not
considered to be beyond a student's control. If you are a student seeking accommodation due to religious observance, you should
follow the steps below under "Seeking Academic Consideration for a Missed Obligation" at least three weeks in advance; do not
use the ACORN AD for religious accommodation.
Process for Seeking Academic Consideration for a Missed Academic Obligation
If you missed a test or an assignment due date, or are registered with Accessibility Services and anticipate needing an extension on
an assignment, please click here.
Students who miss an academic obligation during the term (i.e., quiz, test, assignment) are responsible for initiating the process of
seeking academic consideration within 3 days of the assessment, including weekends and holidays. These special consideration
requests are made to the department and not to instructors, and for reasons beyond the student's control. Students who do not seek
academic consideration will receive a zero on the assessment in question.
If you are feeling ill, do not start your test/quiz. Instead, seek medical attention immediately. Students cannot seek academic
consideration for a test or quiz they have already begun.
Instructors may accept term work until the last day of the term. Instructors may also, at their discretion, grant extensions for term
work until the end of the examination period, with the approval of the chair of the department. Petitions are required for extensions
beyond end of term or for deferred examinations. Visit the Office of the Registrar website to learn more about petitions.
Late Assignments
In order not to be considered late, assignments must be submitted by the due date listed on the syllabus Y ou are expected
to keep a back-up, hard copy of your assignment in case it is lost.
Late assignments for reasons that are within your control will be penalized 5% marks per day. The penalty will run from the
day the assignment was due until the day it is submitted to [to the instructor via Quercus and university email account.
The penalty period includes weekends and holidays.
Assignments that are more than seven 7 days late will not be accepted.
Late assignments must be submitted in accordance with the instructions above; other faculty and staff within the department cannot
and will not accept late assignments
Re-marking Pieces of Term Work
A student who believes that their written term work has a substantive error in grading may ask the person who marked the work for
re-evaluation. Students have up to one month from the date of return of an item of term work to inquire about the mark and file an
appeal. For example, should the marked term work be made available on March 3rd, the student has until April 3rd to seek remarking.
Requests for re-marking should include an explanation written by the student detailing why they believe the work was
incorrectly/unfairly assessed, referring only to their work, assignment/test guidelines, rubrics, etc as needed. Decisions will be
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 5 of 13
provided to students in a timely fashion.
As per the university's policy, only term work worth at least 20% of the course mark may be appealed beyond the instructor. To
escalate an appeal beyond the instructor, the student must submit the re-eavluation request, original piece of work, and all
correspondence on the matter of re-evaluation to the associate chair.
For more on the university's re-marking policy, please click here.
This process applies only to term work; appeals for re-reads of final examinations are handled directly by the Office of the
Registrar.
Electronic Communication and Electronic Learning Technology
Email communication is rapid, convenient, and efficient—and you are encouraged to use it to enhance your learning and
experience in the course. With that said, it is essential that you follow a few rules. Note: Emails that do not follow these
guidelines will not receive a response.
Assignments must be submitted to the instructor via Quercus.
Assignments will not be accepted via email. See above for how to submit them.
All course communication should be conducted through Quercus or your U of T email account.
All emails must include the course code (e.g., SOC123) in the subject line.
All emails should be signed with the student's full name and student number.
Emails from students will generally be answered within 24 hours, excluding holidays and weekends, of receipt.
Treat emails as you would any other professional communication. Proofread. Use appropriate language.
Emails that ask questions that are answered in the course syllabus or website (e.g., "how much is assignment X worth") will
not receive a response.
All general questions about the course that are NOT addressed on the syllabus and course website should be posted to the
'general inquiries' section of the Quercus Discussions.
Classroom Etiquette
Students are expected to arrive to class on time.
If and when (at the instructor's discretion) laptop usage is allowed in class, they should be used for notes only. Other uses (e.g.,
emailing, web surfing) will result in the student being required to turn off the laptop and it may affect their participation mark.
Videotaping and recording lectures is strictly forbidden without written permission. Please email your instructor to discuss.
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the
University of Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats
cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and
the process for addressing academic offences.
Copying, plagiarizing, falsifying medical certificates, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student
caught engaging in such activities will be referred to the Dean’s office for adjudication and punishment. Any student abetting or
otherwise assisting in such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources. By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the university's rules regarding academic
conduct, as outlined in the Calendar. You are expected to be familiar with the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and Code of
Student Conduct.
Student Services and Resources
The university offers a variety of student support services and resources, which can be found at
http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/current-students. This includes supports for your academics, health, and wellness, and other student
services.
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 6 of 13
Date Topic
2024-01-08 Classical Sociological Perspectives on Nature and the Environment: Marx, Weber and Durkheim
"The Science of Climate Change" in Constance Lever-Tracy (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of Climate Change
and Society (Available Online via the U of T Library System)
Stewart Lockie (2015) "What is Environmental Sociology?", Environmental Sociology,1(3):139-142.
John B. Foster, (1999) "Marx's theory of metabolic rift: Classical foundations for environmental sociology"
American Journal of Sociology
John B. Foster and H. Hollemen, 2012 " Weber and the environment: Classical foundations for a
postexemptionalist sociology", American Journal of Sociology
EA Rosa and L Richter (2008) "Durkheim on the environment: Ex Libris or Ex Cathedra? Introduction to
inaugural lecture to a course in social science, 1887-1888", Organization & Environment.
Clark, Brett et. al. 2018 "The Du Bois Nexus:Intersectionality, Political Economy, and Environmental Justice in
the Peruvian Guano Trade in the 1800's" Environmental Sociology 4(1)54-66.
Baber, Zaheer. 2022. 'The Catastrophic World': Capitalism, Climate Crisis, Covid 19 and C. Wright Mills",
Critical Sociology.
2024-01-15 Contemporary Sociological Perspectives on the Environment and Climate Change I
Spaargaren, Gert and Arthur P. J. Mol. 1992. "Sociology, Environment, and Modernity: Ecological
Modernization as a Theory of Social Change." Society & Natural Resources 5(4):323-44.
Mol, Arthur P.J. and David A. Sonnenfeld. 2000. Ecological Modernisation Around the World: An
Introduction," Environmental Politics 9(1): 1-14
W. Catton and Riley E. Dunlap, 1980. "A New Ecological Paradigm for Post-Exhuberant Sociology", American
Behavioral Scientist, 24:15-47
Kenneth Gould, David Pellow and Allan Schnaiberg (2004) "Interrogating the Treadmill of Production:
Everything you wanted to know about the Treadmill but were afraid to ask", Organization and Environment,
17(3):296-316
Course Schedule
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 7 of 13
2024-01-22 Contemporary Sociological Perspectives on Climate Change II
Riley Dunlap and Robert Brulle (eds) Climate Change and Society, Chapter 2: "The Human (Anthropogenic)
Driving Forces of Global Climate Change."
Robert J. Antonio and Brett Clark, "The Climate Change Divide in Social Theory" in Riley Dunlap and Robert
Brulle (eds.) Climate Change and Society Chapter 11.
Ryan Gunderson (2015) "Environmental Sociology and the Frankfurt School 1: Reason and Capital",
Environmental Sociology, 1(3):224-235.
Jason W. Moore, (2017) "The Capitalocene, Part I: On the nature and origins of our ecological crisis", Journal
of Peasant Studies
Jason W. Moore, (2017) "Metabolic Rift or Metabolic Shift? Dialectics, Nature and the World-Historical
Method", Theory and Society
2024-01-29 Public Opinion and Media Representations
Riley E. Dunlap and Robert J. Brulle (eds) Chapter 9: Rachel Shwom et. al., "Public Opinion on Climate
Change"
A. McCright and Riley Dunlap, (2011). The Politicization of Climate Change and Polarization in the American
Public's Views of Global Warming. The Sociological Quarterly 52(2), 155-194.
Constance Lever-Tracy (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Climate Change and Society, Chapter 10: "Public
Opinion" and Chapter 11: "Media Representations of Climate Change"
M. C. Stoddart and J. Smith (2016) "The Endangered Arctic, the Arctic as Resource Frontier: Canadian News
Media Narratives of Climate Change and the North", Canadian Review of Sociology, Vol. 53, No. 3:316-336.
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 8 of 13
2024-02-12 Climate Change Denial
N. Oreske, "The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change", Science (2004), science.sciencemag.org
"Silence of the Labs" CBC Fifth Estate Documentary available on Youtube
William Carroll et. al. "The Corporate Elite and the Architecture of Climate Change Denial" Canadian Review
of Sociology, August, 2018, Vol. 43:425-450
A. M. McCright and Riley E. Dunlap, "Cool Dudes: The denial of climate change among conservative white
males in the United States." Global environmental change, 2011.
Robert J. Antonio and Robert J. Brulle, "The unbearable lightness of politics: climate change denial and political
polarization" The Sociological Quarterly, 2011
Kari Marie Norgaard (2012) "Climate Denial: Emotion, Psychology, Culture and Political Economy" in John
Dryzek and David Schlosberg (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society (Oxford University
Press, Online via University of Toronto, Robarts Library Catalogue System)
Walenta, Jayme 2021. "The Making of the Corporate Carbon Footprint", Journal of Cultural Economy Vol. 14,
No. 5: pp. 533-548.
2024-02-26 Climate Change and Gender
Documentary: "Hands-On: Women and Climate Change" Vimeo, 48 minutes
A. M. McCright, (2010) "The effects of gender on climate change knowledge and concern in the American
public", Population and Environment
S. MacGregor, (2009) "A stranger silence still: the need for feminist social research on climate change" The
Sociological Review
M. Alston, (2011) "Gender and climate change in Australia", Journal of Sociology
McCright, Aaron M. and Chenyang Xiao. 2014. "Gender and Environmental Concern Insights from Recent
Work and for Future Research." Society & Natural Resources
Skutsch, M. M. 2002 "Protocols, Treaties and Action: The Climate Change Process viewed through gender
spectacles", Gender and Development
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 9 of 13
2024-03-04 Climate Justice, Injustice and Social Inequality
Dunlap and Brulle book Chapter 5: "Climate Justice and Inequality"
Constance Lever-Tracy book, Chapter 27: "Justice and the Politics of Social Change."
K Paprocki, "Threatening Dystopias: Development and Adaptation Regimes in Bangladesh" Annals of the
American Association of Geographers, 2018
Myra J Hird, Waste, Environmental Politics and Dis/Engaged Publics,
Theory, Culture & Society34(2-3) 2017.
Whyte, Kyle. "Too late for indigenous climate justice: Ecological and relational tipping points." Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 11.1 (2020): e603 (Available via U of Library System)
*J. Huseman and D. Short (2012) "A Slow Industrial Genocide": Tar Sands and the indigenous peoples of
Northern Alberta" The International Journal of Human Rights, Vol. 16, Issue 1: 216-237.
Thomas Piketty (2022) "Redistributing Wealth to Save the Planet", Le Monde
https://www.lemonde.fr/blog/piketty/2022/11/08/redistributing-wealth-to-save-the-planet/
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 10 of 13
2024-03-11 Climate Change Induced Migration and Social Conflict
R. Reuveny (2007) "Climate Change-induced Migration and Violent Conflict" Political Geography, Vol. 26,
Issue 6:656-673
Eran Feitelson, Abdelrahman Tamimi, Gad Rosenthal, (2012)
Climate change and security in the Israeli-Palestinian context
Journal of Peace Research
Adano, Wario R, Dietz, Ton, Witsenburg, Karen, Zaal, Fred (2012) "Climate change, violent conflict and local
institutions in Kenya's drylands" Journal of Peace Research
Thomas Bernauer, Tobias Siegfried (2012)"Climate change and international water conflict in Central Asia"
Journal of Peace Research
"The Century fo Climate Migration" The Guardian, The Long Read, 18 August, 2022.
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 11 of 13
2024-03-18 Global Agreements and Institutional Responses: Rio, Kyoto, COP, Copenhagen, Paris, the IPCC
Steven Yearley (2009) "Sociology and climate change after Kyoto: What roles for social science in
understanding climate change?" Current Sociology
MM Skutsch " Protocols, treaties, and action: the 'climate change process' viewed through gender
spectacles"Gender & Development, 2002
SR Brechin, "Comparative public opinion and knowledge on global climatic change and the Kyoto Protocol:
The US versus the World?" International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 2003
Constance Lever-Tracy book, Chapter 28: "International Law Responses to Climate Change."
"Making Sense of COP14" The Guardian 5 December, 2022.
"COP 27 Explained" The Guardian, 11 October, 2021.
Tim Flannery, "The Paris Catastrophe" New York Review of Books
https://www.nybooks.com/daily/2017/06/03/paris-catastrophe-climate-agreement/
Tim Flannery, "The Copenhagen Crisis" New York Review of Books
https://www.nybooks.com/daily/2009/11/16/copenhagen-crisis-why-the-us-needs-cap-and-trade/
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 12 of 13
2024-03-25 Technological "Solutions", Social Movements and Possible Futures
Maniates, Michael F. 2001. "Individualization: Plant a Tree, Buy a Bike, Save the World?" Global
Environmental Politics 1:31-52.
Stan Cox, "Pseudo-Solutions: An Engineer, an Economist and an Ecomodernist walk into a bar and order a free
lunch" https://climateandcapitalism.com/2018/07/30/ecomodernist-free-lunch/www.climateandcapitalism.com
Janette Webb, 2012. "Climate Change and Society: The Chimera of Behaviour Change Technologies."
Sociology. 46, 1:
Constance Lever-Tracy book, Chapter 29: "Pushing past neo-liberalism"
Dunlap and Brulle book, Chapter 8: "Civil Society, Social Movements and Climate Change."
Ronnie Lipschutz and Corina McKendry (2012) "Social Movements and Global Civil Society" in John Dryzek
and David Schlosberg (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society (online via U of T Robarts
Library Catalogue)
J. Huseman and D. Short (2012) "A Slow Industrial Genocide": Tar Sands and the indigenous peoples of
Northern Alberta" The International Journal of Human Rights, Vol. 16, Issue 1: 216-237.
Elizabeth A. Bradshaw (2015) "Blockadia Rising: Rowdy Greens, Direct Action and the Keystone XL
Pipeline", Critical Criminology, Vol. 23, Issue 4:433-448.
Robert Pollin, "De-Growth vs. A New Green Deal" July-August, New Left Review 2018
Martinez-Alier, Joan, Lech Temper, Daniela Del Bene and Arnim Scheidel. 2016. "Is There a Global
Environmental Justice Movement?" The Journal of Peasant Studies. Published online 28 April.
Baber, Zaheer. 2019 "Climate Change and the Yellow Vest Movement", Economic and Political Weekly Vol.
54,No. 34.
2024-04-01 Final Test: Two Essays and a Short Answer Question
Last Date to drop course from Academic Record and GPA is March 11, 2024.
Every attempt will be made to follow this schedule, but it is subject to change at the discretion of the instructor.
SOC465H5S - Baber, Zaheer 2023-12-14 13:20:57 Page 13 of 13