Powered by AI
Copilot
CIVL490 - Civil Engineering Design Project
University:
Central Technical University
Course Duration:
Full Year (Fall 2023 & Winter 2024)
Instructor:
Dr. Robert Williams
Contact Information:
robert.williams@ctu.edu
Offi ce Hours:
Tuesdays and Thursdays, 2:00 PM - 4:00 PM
COURSE INFORMATION
Class Meeting Schedule:
Meets 9/5/2023 through 4/10/2024
Class Meeting Dates:
Weekly meetings; Wednesday 10:00 AM - 12:50 PM
Classroom:
Engineering Building, Room 201
Course Format:
This course includes lectures, hands-on projects, team activities, and presentations.
Materials - Textbooks, Readings, Supplementary Readings
Textbook Required:
“Civil Engineering Design Projects” by M. D. Meyer and E. J. Sullivan
Software Recommended:
Microsoft Offi ce - MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint
CAD software (e.g., AutoCAD, Civil 3D)
Structural analysis software (e.g., SAP2000, ETABS)
Course Description
This fi nal-year capstone course involves the design and analysis of a comprehensive civil engineering project.Students work in teams to tackle a real-world problem, such as designing a bridge, a building, or a water treatmentfacility. The course emphasizes hands-on experience with design, analysis, and project management.
Prerequisites:
Senior Classifi cation, Civil Engineering Majors only. Course must be scheduled in the fi nal year ofgraduation and with Instructor’s consent.
Learning Outcomes of Instruction
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
1.
Apply civil engineering principles to the design of infrastructure projects.
2.
Conduct detailed structural analysis and design.
3.
Develop and implement project management plans.
4.
Perform environmental impact assessments.
5.
Work effectively in teams to complete a project.
6.
Communicate project results through written reports and oral presentations.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Minimal Technical Skills Needed:
Microsoft Offi ce - MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint
CAD software (e.g., AutoCAD, Civil 3D)
Structural analysis software (e.g., SAP2000, ETABS)
Instructional Methods:
The instructional methods in this course include: lectures, hands-on projects, team activities, progress reports, andpresentations. Course materials will be posted on the course website.
Student Responsibilities or Tips for Success in the Course:
Students must attend course meetings, participate in class work and discussions, and perform required courseassessments supporting the anticipated learning objectives, such as progress reports and design demonstrations.Students are expected to regularly log into the course website to download course material, submit theircoursework as instructed, and follow up on new announcements. This course covers advanced content thatrequires at least 6 hours of extensive work per week.
Attendance Policy
Class Attendance Requirement (one lateness = 1/2 absence):
# of Absences
Point Deduction
0 - 3
0
4 - 5
-2
6 - 7
-4
>7
-30
GRADING
Final grades in this course will be based on the following scale:
Grade
Percentage
A
90%-100%
B
80%-89%
C
70%-79%
Grade
Percentage
D
60%-69%
F
59% or Below
Assessments
The following assessments will be performed during this course to assess individual progress towards learningoutcomes:
Assessment
Weight
Due Time
Team Formation and Project Proposal
10%
September 15, 2023
Preliminary Design Review
15%
October 10, 2023
Structural Analysis and Design
20%
November 7, 2023
Midterm Presentation
10%
December 5, 2023
Environmental Impact Assessment
15%
February 15, 2024
Detailed Design Document
20%
March 20, 2024
Final Presentation and Demonstration
10%
April 10, 2024
Relationship between Assessments and Course/Student Learning Outcomes
Learning Outcomes of Instruction
Assessment
1. Apply civil engineering principles to the design ofinfrastructure projects.
Project Proposal, Design Reviews,Reports
2. Conduct detailed structural analysis and design.
Structural Analysis, DesignDocuments
3. Develop and implement project management plans.
Project Proposal, Progress Reports
4. Perform environmental impact assessments.
Environmental Impact Assessment
5. Work effectively in teams to complete a project.
Team Activities, Presentations
6. Communicate project results through written reports and oralpresentations.
Reports, Presentations
Capstone Project
Students are required to work on a design project, present their work progress on a regular basis, perform designdemonstrations of their design, and submit a comprehensive fi nal report of their design by the end of the course.
Students will work in groups. The project design process includes problem statements, objectives, technical designspecifi cations, component selections, design constraints, professional codes and standards, and projectmanagement and implementation. This project should demonstrate the student’s ability to transfer the knowledgeand skills acquired in their civil engineering courses to provide solutions for real-world applications.
Student Outcomes (ABET)
The civil engineering program must have documented student outcomes that support the program educationalobjectives. Attainment of these outcomes prepares graduates to enter the professional practice of engineering.Student outcomes are outcomes (1) through (7), plus any additional outcomes that may be articulated by the civilengineering program. This course will assess the achievement of the following student outcomes:
1.
An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specifi ed needs with consideration ofpublic health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors.
2.
An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences.
3.
An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informedjudgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental,and societal contexts.
4.
An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create acollaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives.
5.
An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies.
TECHNOLOGY REQUIREMENTS
LMS:
All course sections offered by Central Technical University have a corresponding course shell in the myLeoOnline Learning Management System (LMS). Below are technical requirements:
LMS Requirements:
LMS Requirements
YouSeeU Virtual Classroom Requirements:
YouSeeU Requirements
ACCESS AND NAVIGATION
You will need your campus-wide ID (CWID) and password to log into the course. If you do not know your CWIDor have forgotten your password, contact the Center for IT Excellence (CITE) at 903.468.6000 orhelpdesk@ctu.edu.
Note: Personal computer and internet connection problems do not excuse the requirement to complete allcoursework in a timely and satisfactory manner. Each student needs to have a backup method to deal with theseinevitable problems. These methods might include the availability of a backup PC at home or work, the temporaryuse of a computer at a friend’s home, the local library, offi ce service companies, Starbucks, a CTU campus opencomputer lab, etc.
COMMUNICATION AND SUPPORT
If you have any questions or are having diffi culties with the course material, please contact your Instructor.
Technical Support:
If you are having technical diffi culty with any part of Brightspace, please contact Brightspace Technical Support at1-877-325-7778. Other support options can be found here:
Brightspace Support
COURSE AND UNIVERSITY PROCEDURES/POLICIES
Course Specifi c Procedures/Policies:
Syllabus Change Policy:
The syllabus is a guide. Circumstances and events, such as student progress, may make it necessary for theinstructor to modify the syllabus during the semester. Any changes made to the syllabus will be announced inadvance.
University Specifi c Procedures:
Student Conduct:
All students enrolled at the University shall follow the tenets of common decency and acceptable behaviorconducive to a positive learning environment. The Code of Student Conduct is described in detail in the StudentGuidebook.
Student Guidebook
Students should also consult the Rules of Netiquette for more information regarding how to interact with studentsin an online forum:
Netiquette
Attendance:
For more information about the attendance policy please visit the Attendance webpage and Procedure13.99.99.R0.01.
Attendance Policy
Academic Integrity:
Students at Central Technical University are expected to maintain high standards of integrity and honesty in all oftheir scholastic work. For more details and the defi nition