SYLLABUS CSC396Y Designing Systems for Real World Problems –Ilona Posner, Berlin 2023 1
CSC396Y Designing Systems for Real World Problems
Computer Science Summer Project 2023 – Study Abroad in Berlin
COURSE INFORMATION & COMMUNICATION DRAFT: Dec 7, 2022
Instructor Prof. ILONA POSNER, ilona.posner@utoronto.ca
Quercus application will be used for all course information & communication. Email via Quercus is the
preferred method of communication with professor. Students should NOT expect immediate email responses.
Attempts will be made to respond to emails in about 24 business hours.
NOTE: The University & Quercus communicate with students using only university email addresses.
Please, make sure that your ROSI email is correctly set to your University email address, for example
your.name@utoronto.ca or that you have created a functioning forward on this email address, to
ensure you do not miss important course related announcements.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Human Centered Design results in robust solutions that successfully address real human problems.
The Summer Abroad provides students with an opportunity to explore new environments, which
improves their ability to see their own world with increased sensitivity and germinates new design
ideas. Students will identify a real world problem and work in groups on projects to address this
problem. Students will begin by exploring their problem space and the people within that space,
identifying users’ needs, system constraints and requirements, and ultimately designing solutions that
incorporate all those components. Designs will be iterated from initial concepts to really valuable
solutions by gathering feedback and usability testing design prototypes with users throughout the
course. The course projects will culminate with development of a robust design that addresses the
identified problem. Final project presentations will take place at the end of the course. This course
has no final exam.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
1. To introduce students to Human Centered Design, Design Thinking and User Experience Design. To
introduce students to some research in these fields.
2. To give students experience in
(a) exploring a problem space and thinking deeply about the space and the people impacted,
(b) understanding target audiences, their current practices, and underlying needs,
(c) iterating design ideas using various prototypes and thinking critically about designs from the
users’ point of view,
(d) usability testing designs with real users and drawing implications from usability testing to
improve the designs,
(f) working in multidisciplinary design teams,
(g) clearly and critically communicating research findings regarding usability of designs and user
experiences in forms of presentations and reports.
3. To instill in students empathy for their future users, clients, and colleagues, in any work area.
4. To prepare the students for further work in related areas.
SYLLABUS CSC396Y Designing Systems for Real World Problems –Ilona Posner, Berlin 2023 2
FIELD TRIP DETAILS
1. Berlin City Walking Tour will be conducted with a guide upon arrival in Berlin
2. Visit to Berlin’s Technology Museum to see historical technological artifacts
3. Visit to FUTURIUM the house of futures
4. Visit to Berlin’s Musical Instruments Museum to explore the evolution of musical technologies
5. Visit to Berlin’s DDR Museum to explore life in the former East Germany
6. HALF DAY TRIP by local commuter train to Human Computer Interaction Laboratory in the Hasso
Plattner Institute at Potsdam University, to see groundbreaking research projects there
7. TWO DAY TRIP to Volkswagen Factory at Autostadt, Wolfsburg, Germany with an overnight stay
and a visit to the Phaeno Science Museum
COURSE OUTLINE
The course is delivered in a number of stages where students take a single project idea and develop it
into a design following an iterative user-centered design process.
• Individually propose a problem space, not a specific problem just yet.
• Review the Toronto Transit system using industry established Heuristics
• Form groups and choose one problem space to focus on with your group.
• Individually conduct research and literature review of the chosen problem space.
• Compile research and choose one specific problem within the chosen problem space.
Define your target audience and conduct primary research.
• Compile group research, analyze results, and develop design guidelines.
• Individually develop low fidelity prototypes (hand-drawn on paper or using low-fi tools).
• Informally usability test individual low-fi prototypes, analyze findings, and compile results.
• Combine individual insights to develop your group’s high-fidelity prototype(s).
• Formally usability test your high-fi prototype(s).
• Update your design concepts using insights from usability testing.
• Deliver final design, documentation, & project presentation.
In addition this course aims to develop students critical thinking regarding user experiences that
surround them day-to-day. To achieve this, students will be asked to compare user experience
aspects of transit systems in Toronto and Berlin.
This course is delivered through a combination of lectures, critique sessions, and project
presentations. This course depends on a significant amount of successful group work. Students will be
expected to form groups at the start of the course and to work in these same groups for the duration
of the course. In past similar courses, groups with students from diverse disciplines have been quite
successful in producing creative, robust, and viable projects; thus multidisciplinary project groups are
strongly encouraged.
COURSE SCHEDULE ASSIGNMENTS & GRADES
This full year Computer Science credit course has demanding curriculum requirements compressed
into a short time span of 4 weeks in Berlin. Thus, students will have the first in-person class meeting
SYLLABUS CSC396Y Designing Systems for Real World Problems –Ilona Posner, Berlin 2023 3
in Toronto in late April, date TBD. Students will complete assignments A0 through A4 prior to
departing for Germany while the rest of the assignments will be completed while in Berlin.
The course will follow the Human/User Centered Design approach that includes: formative research
to explore the problem space and its current reality, iterative design to develop a solution in several
phases with increasing detail using input from the target audience, and summative research to verify
the proposed solution actually delivers on its promise. These components will comprise the core of
the course making up 75% of the grade.
The final 25% will be awarded to course participation. This is a group project course so working
successfully in a group is a requirement. The course participation grade will be determined by your
contribution to group-work (using confidential evaluations from each group member) combined with
the instructor’s evaluation.
The group work component will be worth 50% of the course grade while the individual work will make
up 50% of the mark, including 25% for participation.
DATES, ASSIGNMENTS, & GRADES
Due
Dates
2023
CLASS
#
Assign
#
Group & Individual Work Assignments
Individual
Work
%
Group
Work
%
Apr TBD A0 Post Pitch a problem space and yourself to your class •
Apr TBD
IN-PERSON MEETING at Woodsworths College, April date TBD,
INTRO CLASS & GROUP FORMATION
May 16 A1 Post Heuristic review of Toronto Transit system 3
May 30 A2 Post Group forms, problem space, individual research plans 1
May 30 A3a Post Individual research paper proposal for approval, for A3 •
June 13 A3b Post Individual research plan & instruments for feedback 2
July 11 A3c Post Individual research results, paper review, Berlin expectations 8
July 22 ARRIVE in BERLIN
July 23 BERLIN City Walking Tour & Welcome Dinner
July 24 1 A3c First class in Berlin. Present Individual research, <2 mins timed •
July 25 2 A4a Present Group combined results in class 4
July 26
July 27
4
A4b Post Group Design Requirements, Experience Map, UX Strategy,
Low-Fi prototype plans
Present A4b in class
10
July 31
Aug 1
5
6
A5 Post Individual low-fi prototypes
In class Usability test individual low-fi prototypes
Post Individual low-fi test results.
Present A5 in class: Individual low-fi test results
10
Aug 6 9 A6 Present A6 in class: Group combined solutions, internal
evaluations, functional prototype(s), & usability test plans 15
Aug 13
Aug 14
12
A7 Post Group usability test results, & updated prototype(s)
Present A7 in class
10
Aug 16
Aug 17
13
14
A8 Present A8 Group Project in-class for practice and feedback
Present A8 Final Group Project for guests. Last Class.
5
5
Aug 17 A9
A10
Post Usability Testing Reflection
Post Peer review, Berlin retrospective, Course evaluation
Class Participation
2
25
TOTALS 50 50
SYLLABUS CSC396Y Designing Systems for Real World Problems –Ilona Posner, Berlin 2023 4
IMPORTANT NOTES ABOUT ASSIGNMENTS & GRADES
Assignments: The course project is divided into a number of assignments, due regularly, starting with
first deliverable being due on Apr TBD and then continuing until the end of the course time in Berlin.
All course deliverables are designed to build on top of each other; omitting any assignment would
significantly disadvantage both the student and their group. Individual assignments are to be
completed, submitted for grading, and shared with other group members. Group components require
analysis of individual work, synthesis, and integration into the larger group submissions and designs.
Late Policy: An assignment due at 11:59 PM if submitted at 12:05 AM is considered to be LATE.
Submissions < 24 hours late incur a 25% penalty. Submissions < 48 hours late incur a 50% penalty.
Submissions more than 48 hours late earn 0%. Exceptions to this policy are to be made only in extreme
circumstances, with communication in advance of the original deadline and may require a medical
certificate or similar document.
Remarking: Students requesting remarking of an assignment must do so in writing within 24 hours after
receiving the assignment. Requests must include detailed reason & contact info. Please note,
assignments submitted for remarking will be remarked fully and may result in lower grades.
WRITTEN WORK
Your ability to conceive of, design, and implement new tools and new designs that truly meet the
needs of you target audience depends critically upon your ability to communicate with these users.
This requires effective writing and speaking skills. All assignments include substantial written work.
Structure and organization, spelling, grammar, word usage, and document appearance will count for
roughly 10% of your grade on the written work. If assignments are not in satisfactory universitylevel
English prose, they will be returned for rewriting.
ACADEMIC OFFENCES
All the work you submit must be done by you (individually or within your group), and your work must
not be submitted by anyone else. Plagiarism is academic fraud and is taken very seriously.
Read Plagiarism in CS http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~fpitt/documents/plagiarism.html and
Arts & Science Code of Behaviour https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/media/15068/view
PROTOTYPING SOFTWARE
For this course you will use your own computer, and the software of your choice. Your group’s
prototype must be viewable in any standard Web browser. In the past students have used Figma,
Sketch, HTML, CSS, C++, Java, Invision, Adobe XD, and even PowerPoint to create their interactive
prototypes. If you are planning to use any software not listed here please discuss it with the
instructor before starting.
SYLLABUS CSC396Y Designing Systems for Real World Problems –Ilona Posner, Berlin 2023 5
INSTRUCTOR BIO
ILONA POSNER is a User Experience (UX) Consultant, Coach, and Educator. Starting in the field more
than 30 years ago, she has seen it evolve from Human Computer Interaction (HCI), to Usability, UX
and now to User Experience Design. She is constantly striving to improve people’s experiences with
technology by focusing on human needs and business goals, while accommodating technological
constraints. Crossing industry boundaries, she has consulted in large corporations and startups, in
different verticals including technology, finance, telecom, healthcare, transportation, and education.
An experienced educator, Ilona Posner has been teaching User Experience since 2000, through project
based design courses, at University of Toronto, OCAD University, and the Media Lab at the Canadian
Film Centre, to hundreds of students, in both the graduate and the undergraduate programs. She
teaches UX Certification courses for Human Factors International since 2003. She also develops and
delivers custom training courses for industry. Ilona Posner has been volunteering with TorCHI, the
Toronto Chapter of the Computer Human Interaction professional interest group and running
international Student Design Competitions at International Conferences. Ilona holds a Master’s
Degree in Computer Science from the University of Toronto.
OPTIONAL COURSE EXTENTION – CSC494H
This portion of the Course Extension may be available to students who have developed viable design
ideas in CSC394 and want to fully develop their designs into functional products. Students will need
to ballot to qualify for this course extension.
What Students Said About This Course
This course has altered past students’ view of the field of Computer Science and has given them a
new perspective on the importance of their user. The skills students gain can be applied in many areas
of Computer Science, product design, and beyond. Students commented after the course:
This course gives us a new concept of computer science, it's interesting and worth learning.
It is a very intersecting course that I think everyone should take. The workload is high.
This course is very beneficial but for those who want to get this credit easily, I don't recommend it.
However, for people who want to learn about user experience, this course is super helpful.
Berlin is a great place to see and this course taught us an important way to look at creating projects.
They will learn a lot from it and get a well-designed project at the end of the course.
I learned a many skills that are very likely to be useful in my future career. My presentation skill has
improved a lot. Although we need to answer questions and talk about own opinions in class, I don't
feel uncomfortable to talk in class. Our professor is really nice. She read through our assignments very
carefully, and always gave us useful and long comments. Because of her enthusiasm towards this
course, we also feel that we want to put more effort on projects and make her happy :).