Page 1 of 9
Course Outline
MGT100H1F – Fundamentals of Management
Fall 2019
Instructor: Michael Khan, RT503 Rotman Building (105 St. George Street)
Email: Please email via Canvas to avoid spam filters
Phone: 416-978-7583
Office Hours: Refer to “Contact” information on Quercus
TA Name: Carol Xie
Email: wenqing.xie@mail.utoronto.ca
(Please include “MGT100” in the subject line)
TA Office Hours: Refer to Quercus
Location: Refer to Quercus
Note: due to the number of students in this course, the TA should be your first point of contact for academic matters. TA office hours and location will be posted on the course site (Portal).
Lecture time and location:
Section
Day
Time
Room Number
L0101
Tue
9am-11am
￼BT 101
Please consult U of T maps online for room address.
Course Scope and Mission
This course is designed to introduce you to the principal functional disciplines of management. It will develop your understanding of what organizations do, and how they are managed across a broad range of functions. The course provides a landscape view of the academic field of commerce, consisting of: 1. an introduction to the role of business in Canadian society; 2. an introduction to the role and tasks of managers and leaders in business; and, 3. an introduction to the management disciplines (strategy, marketing, human resources, operations, accounting, and finance).
Page 2 of 9
The mission of the course is to expose beginning students to Canadian business and to provide students with a context in which they can pursue their education in the field of commerce. Class sessions will consist of lectures, case studies, and/or exercises.
Course Exclusions
RSM 100H1, RSM 100Y1
Required Course Materials
Contemporary Business (2nd Canadian Edition) Boone, Kurtz, Khan & Canzer packaged with Wiley Plus access codes from the bookstore (Top Hat sold separately). ISBN 9781119442011
Top Hat Online Classroom Engagement Application: Join Code = 033285
GRADE DETERMINATION
Midterm Test
39%
Final Exam
50%
Research Requirement
1%
Online quizzes
10%
Total
100%
REQUIREMENTS AND CRITERIA
Online Quizzes
Regular quizzes will be assigned by the instructors, using the WileyPLUS platform and Quercus. The instructor will provide detailed requirements in class. All quizzes are to be completed individually.
Quizzes will be due at 11:59pm as per the dates on course schedule on the last page of this outline. Your lowest (or missing quiz) will be dropped (with no medical/official documentation required) to account for illness, personal or technology related issues. Due to the amount of time you have to complete quizzes and that your lowest/missing quiz will be dropped, no other concession will be given for missed/late quizzes. Be sure to submit your quiz well in advance to avoid last minute technical/internet/personal related issues. Quizzes may test any content from before and/or content from the upcoming lecture. WileyPLUS is an online tool that comes packaged with all new course texts at the University of Toronto bookstore or can be purchased standalone at the bookstore cash desk. WileyPLUS contains the full e-text so if you are comfortable studying off your computer or tablet you can save money by buying the standalone code.
Available in WileyPLUS is ORION, a self-study tool that can help identify what areas you’ll need to focus on as you develop through the course. We highly recommend you make use of the diagnostic tools, especially when preparing for midterms and exams.
Page 3 of 9
If you need any technical support, contact www.wileyplus.com/support. Do not contact the course instructor or TAs for WileyPLUS related technical questions.
Midterm Test and Final Examination
A midterm test will be held as per the course schedule. The final exam will be scheduled during the exam period. The midterm test and final exam will consist of a series of multiple choice and/or short answer questions that test your knowledge of the material that is discussed in class sessions and that is found in the textbook. In class, we will complement the material in the textbook with examples and case studies. We assume that you have read and are familiar with the assigned readings prior to class as we will not cover all the material in the textbook, though you are responsible for all of it.
If you are unable to write the midterm due to illness or domestic tragedy, appropriate documentation must be provided to Rotman Commerce Academic services for their approval.
The midterm and the final examination will test text material not covered in class as class time is limited. The ability to self-study material will be a critical skill during your university experience. The exam date will not be known until the applicable exam schedule is released by the Faculty of Arts and Science. Do not book any travel before receiving the exam schedule.
Aids Allowed
No study aids are allowed. You may use a non-programmable hand-held calculator.
Research Requirement
Marketing and Organizational Behaviour researchers run experimental studies to test theories about human behaviour. The research requirement in this course is intended to supplement the material on marketing and organizational behaviour by giving you direct exposure to research in these fields. You may fulfill this requirement by:
1. Participation in one hour (credit) of research studies, or
2. Analysis of one article that reports research studies
Note, this is not an extra credit assignment, credit-hours of participation translate into real point (percentage) values, as determined by the professor whose course you are enrolled in (check your syllabus). You will receive one credit-hour towards your course grade for each one-hour of research study participation you complete: each credit-point may be comprised of a single 1-point study, two 0.5 credit studies, or an article analysis that you complete, up to a maximum of one point for this course.
USING SONA: PRE-REGISTERED ACCOUNT AND COURSE REGISTRATION
To participate in a research study, you will need to sign into our Rotman Behavioural Research Lab (BRL) research participation website (Sona): https://rotman.sona-systems.com/. Please add both the Sona Admin, rotman-admin@sona-systems.net, and Behavioural Research Lab, Behavioural.Lab@rotman.utoronto.ca, email addresses, to the contact list of the email account linked to your Sona account. This will ensure that registration and password reset links and
Page 4 of 9
important updates regarding your account and the study participation assignment are not mistakenly marked as spam.
Former Participants: those with existing BRL credit-pool accounts on Sona can use their previous credentials to log into Sona, and immediately, begin registering for courses as soon as they are posted.
New Users: those of you new to our credit pool, have had your course(s) added to an account that has been created for you. This account is linked to your “[Username]@mail.utoronto.ca” email address, and a link to complete registration has been sent to that address.
Trouble Logging In: if you have overlooked your password registration link, or forgotten details of your log-in information, please use the “Forgot Password” feature on the Sona log-in page to have these credentials sent to the email linked to your Sona account (UofT address for new users).
Please familiarize yourself with the “Student Research-Participation Guide,” made available to you by your professor: this guide, as well as the FAQ on Sona, cover all the pertinent steps and criteria for registering for studies and completing your participation requirement through either study participation or article analyses. Feel free to email Behavioural.Lab@rotman.utoronto.ca if you have any question.
Participation opportunities in research studies for the fall session are anticipated to begin the week of September 9th, 2019, and the final participation deadline is November 1st , 2019.
Top Hat software
We will be using the Top Hat (www.tophat.com) classroom response system in class. You will be able to submit answers to in-class questions using Apple or Android smartphones and tablets, laptops, or through text message.
You can visit the Top Hat Overview (https://success.tophat.com/s/article/Student-Top-Hat-Overview-and-Getting-Started-Guide) within the Top Hat Success Center which outlines how you will register for a Top Hat account, as well as providing a brief overview to get you up and running on the system.
You can register by simply visiting our course website: https://app.tophat.com/e/033285 Note: our Course Join Code is 033285. Note, the bookstore provides a discount compared to the online price.
Should you require assistance with Top Hat at any time, due to the fact that they require specific user information to troubleshoot these issues, please contact their Support Team directly by way of email (support@tophat.com), the in app support button, or by calling 1-888-663-5491.
You must register before the start of week 2 of the course.
Many other University of Toronto courses require Top Hat. Your license is valid for these courses as well. Please ensure your subscription extends far enough to cover all courses that may use Top Hat.
Page 5 of 9
Lead Instructor:
Michael Khan
Michael Khan is an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream at the Rotman School of Management. He has taught courses at the University of Toronto’s three campuses since 2001 in the areas of Management, Accounting and Auditing. He has won awards for teaching excellence at both the undergraduate and MBA level. Michael obtained his B.Com. from the University of Toronto and holds an MBA from the Schulich School of Business, York University. He also holds the designations of: Chartered Professional Accountancy (CPA, CA), Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA) and Certified Information Technology Professional (CITP) and is also Certified in the Governance of Enterprise Information Technology (CGEIT). He currently trains CPA students for CPA Ontario. Michael’s professional experience includes roles at Ernst & Young, Deloitte and his independent consultancy practice.
In order to enrich the content of this course, the course is team taught with various industry specialists to enhance the learning experience where appropriate. This is also a valuable networking opportunity for students.
POLICY AND PROCEDURE
Missed Assignments/Midterms
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may submit a request for special consideration. The Request for Special Consideration Form and supporting documentation must be submitted in a timely manner in order for the request to be reviewed.
In such cases, students must notify the Rotman Commerce Program Office on the date of the course deliverable such as a missed test, or assignment missed class (in the case of participation marks), or due date. They must then complete a Request for Special Consideration Form and submit it along with supporting documentation (e.g. Verification of Student Illness or Injury form) to the Rotman Commerce Office within 2 business days of the originally scheduled course deliverable. Students who do not provide appropriate or sufficient supporting documentation will be given a grade of 0 (zero) for the missed course deliverable.
Documentation submitted in support of petitions for missing tests and assignments must be original; no faxed or scanned copies will be accepted.
Note that the physician’s report must establish that the patient was examined and diagnosed at the time of illness, not after the fact. Rotman Commerce will not accept a statement that merely confirms a later report of illness made by the student to a physician.
Students who follow the above procedures will have the weight of their midterm exam transferred to their final exam (and their final exam will be worth the weight of the midterm + final exam combined).
Submission of Assignments
Late submissions of any assignment may be considered; however, a resolution may be determined at the instructor’s discretion and may include an academic penalty.
Page 6 of 9
Accessibility Needs
The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility. If you require accommodations for a disability, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca or http://www.accessibility.utoronto.ca/.
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarships at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectively, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the UofT degree that you earn will continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences, and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
 Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
 Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
 Making up sources or facts.
 Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed individually).
On test and exams:
 Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
 Looking at someone else's answers
 Misrepresenting your identity.
 Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation:
 Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
 Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to), medical notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any question about what is or is not permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other UofT resources such as College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre.
Email
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by email. As such, all UofT students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are
Page 7 of 9
responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up AND properly entered on the ROSI system. For more information please visit http://help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html
Forwarding your mail.utoronto.ca email to a Hotmail, Gmail, Yahoo or other type of email account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Hotmail, Gmail or Yahoo accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder.
Quercus and the Course Page
The online course page for this course is accessed through Quercus. To access the course page, go to the UofT Portal login at https://portal.utoronto.ca/ and log in using your UTORid and password. Once you have logged in, look for the My Courses module where you’ll find the link to all your course websites. If you don’t see the course listed here but you are properly registered for the course in ROSI, wait 48 hours. If the course does not appear, go to the Information Commons Help Desk in Robarts Library, 1st floor, for help, or explore the Portal Information and Help at http://www.portalinfo.utoronto.ca/content/information-students and review the Frequently Asked Questions.
Recording Lectures
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit permission, and may not do so unless permission is granted (note: students who have been previously granted permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are, of course, excepted). This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus materials, etc.
If permission is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to “publish” them in anyway. It is absolutely forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a website or sell them in any other form without formal permission.
SUS101: Saving Paper in Courses
“Each year at U of T, an estimated 10 million sheets of paper are used in the printing of lecture slides, tests, assignments, and other course materials in 1st and 2nd year courses alone” (Sustainability Office, University of Toronto). In order to reduce this number, we are taking part in a program called “SUS101: Saving Paper in Courses”.
Please do your part in helping to conserve paper in this (and all other) courses. Consider the following ideas:
 Avoid printing electronic documents – get used to working with them from digital format (you will need to do this in your professional careers);
 Make your own notes in electronic documents (e.g. MS Word, Excel, Google Docs, etc);
 If you are printing, make sure you select double-sided printing (available at all libraries);
 Take leadership and share your concerns and ideas with all of us so we can improve our practices.
CONDUCT OF CLASSES AND EXPECTATIONS
Since RSM100 is a preparatory class on management and organizations, we aim to run the course in a way which will be consistent with the world of business - where many of you will
Page 8 of 9
spend your working lives. We strive to provide accurate information, quality materials, and good service consistent with our obligations to maintain the high academic standards of the University of Toronto.
We expect that you will conduct yourself in a way that prepares you for the working world:
 We start on time, so please do not arrive late and disrupt others. Leaving class early is also disruptive to your colleagues and will not be permitted unless you have made prior arrangements with the instructor.
 Please, always turn off your cell phone, pager, and watch alarms.
 Please do not use computers in class for purposes EXCEPT taking notes on the lecture. Using your laptop to message on Facebook, play Solitaire, or otherwise surf the web are unacceptable in-class activities, and will be treated as disruptive behaviour if detected.
 Please do not eat in class; (drinking water or coffee are acceptable exceptions to this rule, but please remove your trash when you’re finished.)
 During the class, respect the learning opportunities of others. DO NOT CHAT WITH YOUR NEIGHBOUR WHILE THE INSTRUCTOR IS LECTURING. If you do so, you may be asked to leave the lecture hall.
 Keep up to date. Make sure that you know the class schedule. Check on the course web page for updates and posted materials.
 Our expectation is that you will not only participate in class discussions for the benefit of your own learning, but also for that of others.
Finally, welcome to the course! We sincerely hope that you succeed in, benefit from, and enjoy this course!
Page 9 of 9
Appendix A – Tentative Course Schedule
Session Week of Topic Chapter
Due Online at
11:59pm
#1 09-Sep Introduction to Commerce & Canadian Business History 1, 3
#2 16-Sep Business, Society & Wealth Creation 5, 6
#3 23-Sep Managing and Leading in Organizations 7
Quiz 1 (Chaps 1, 3,
5, 6)
Due Sep 29th
#4 30-Sep Strategic Human Resource Management 8
#5 07-Oct Corporate Social Responsibility 2
Quiz 2 (Chaps 2, 7,
8)
Due Oct 13th
#6 14-Oct
Midterm Examination – In Class
Testing Material from Sessions 1-5 (Inclusive)
#7 21-Oct Canada in World Markets 4,16
Draft Peer Evaluation
Due Oct 25th
#8 28-Oct Business Strategy and Accounting 4, 15, 17
Business Plan
Oct 31st
04-Nov Reading Week – No Class
#9 11-Nov Operations Management, Teamwork & Strategy Part II 9, 10
Quiz 3 (Chaps 4, 9,
10, 15, 16, 17)
Due Nov 17th
#10 18-Nov
Contemporary Issues: Government and Climate Change and its
Impact on Business
On Quercus
#11 25-Nov Data Analytics 14
#12 02-Dec Walmart Integrated Case Analysis Part II and Course Wrap-up 15, 17
As per
exam
schedule
December Final Exam (Cumulative)