Course Outline
Course Code
RSM 220 H1 F
Course Name
Intermediate Financial Accounting I
Term, Year
Fall, 2023
Course Meets
L0101 T 9-11am – WO
L0201 T 11-1pm – WO
L0301 Th 11-1pm – WO
L0401 F 9-11am – WO
Web page URL
https://q.utoronto.ca
Instructor Details
Name
Email
Phone
Office Hours
Baohua Xin
Jeffrey Callen
bxin@rotman.utoronto.ca
callen@rotman.utoronto.ca
(416) 946-7166
(416) 946-5641
T 2:30 – 4pm or by appt.
TBD
Course Scope, Mission and Learning Outcomes
This course introduces Rotman Commerce students to intermediate financial accounting, including both conceptual and technical aspects. Upon successful completion of this course you will be able to: 1. Examine the conceptual framework underlying financial reporting; 2. Prepare financial statements; and, 3. Assess the accounting for revenue recognition, current assets (including cash, receivables, and inventory), and long-term assets (including property plant & equipment and intangibles – goodwill excluded).
Course Prerequisites
RSM 219 H1; Completion of the Rotman Commerce Guaranteed Admission requirements.
Course Materials (Required Readings)
1. Kieso, et al., Intermediate Accounting 13th Canadian Ed. V1 loose-leaf textbook with WileyPLUS Vol 1 Access: 9781119740513. 2022 John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd. (Alternatively, Kieso, et al., Intermediate Accounting 13ce V1 WileyPLUS Access: 9781119740421)
2. CPA Canada Standards and Guidance Collection (CPACHB): Electronic version is available through the University's library e-resources – at: https://www.rotman.utoronto.ca/FacultyAndResearch/BIC/Research/DatabasesBySubject
under “CPA Canada Standards and Guidance”
3. Additional readings will be posted on the course website.
Evaluation and Grades
Grades are a measure of the knowledge and skills developed by a student within individual courses. Each student will receive a grade on the basis of how well they have command of the course materials, skills and learning objectives of the course.
2
Work
Percentage of Grade
Due Date
Homework (WileyPLUS via Quercus)
15%
8 weekly HW (Starting Week 3)
Mid -Term Test
35%
TBA (Week of October 16)
Assignment: Case
10%
TBA
Final Term Test
40%
FAS Final Exam Period
Homework – via WileyPLUS on Quercus
You are required to complete homework for the chapter(s) covered after the lecture. Homework is accessed through your WileyPLUS account on Quercus. Homework will be accessible on Mondays at 8pm, and due the following Mondays at 8pm unless the due date falls on a holiday, which will be extended to 8pm the following day. Homework must be completed individually and may consist of different types of questions (e.g., multiple choice, short-answer, essay, etc.). There will be 8 to complete over the term, as well as one optional practice homework (in week 2).
Late submissions will not be accepted and failure to successfully compete and submit your homework before the deadline will result in a mark of zero. Given that you have one week to complete and submit your homework, missed submissions will be considered only in extreme situations (and mark will be allocated to other homework submissions).
Group Assignment
Details for the group assignment will be posted on the course website.
The group assignment is intended to help you develop your communication skills. How well you communicate your ideas will be considered in the evaluation of the assignment. In your written assignments, you should aim for clarity, strong organization, concision, professionalism, and correct grammar. Sources in written assignments, should always be correctly attributed.
Support is available through the RC Centre for Professional Skills (CPS) for students who would like help or feedback on their writing. CPS offers both individual and group appointments with trained writing instructors who are familiar with the RC program and common types of business assignments. You can also access your college Writing Centres for help with written assignments.
You can book an appointment with a writing coach through the RC Centre for Professional Skills Writing Centre. For more information about writing centres, student supports, and study resources, see the Writing and Presentation Coaching academic support page.
The group assignment requires students to work in teams of no more than three. Learning to work together in teams is a crucial transferrable skill you will use not only in your coursework, but also in your future careers. Support is available if you encounter common teamwork challenges such as:
• Team members feeling left out of the team.
• Team members not responding in a timely manner to communication.
• Division or quality of work among team members being unequal or unfair.
Consult the Centre for Professional Skills Teamwork Resources page for tips, strategies, and best practices. You can also book an appointment with a teamwork mentor through the RC Centre for Professional Skills Writing Centre. Teamwork mentors can help you resolve or mitigate conflict, strategize on planning, or improve team communication.
If you are a student registered with Accessibility Services, and extensions are one of your academic accommodations, consult with your Accessibility Advisor about the teamwork in this course.
3
Mid -Term Test
The mid-term test date and time will be announced later. Additional information will be posted on the course websites. Mid-term test will cover material from weeks 1 through 5.
Aids Allowed
No study aids are allowed. You may use a non-programmable hand-held calculator.
Final Term Test
The final term test will be held in the December “assessment period”. The date and time of the final term test will be announced later. It may consist of multiple choice questions, short answer questions, problems, and/or a case. Additional information will be posted on the course website. It will cover all materials from the entire course.
Aids Allowed
No study aids are allowed. You may use a non-programmable hand-held calculator.
Missed Tests and Assignments (including mid-term and final-term assessments)
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may request special consideration within 2 business days of the missed midterm/test/assignment due date.
In such cases, students must:
1. Complete the Request for Special Consideration form: https://uoft.me/RSMConsideration
2. Provide documentation to support the request, eg. Absence Declaration from ACORN, medical note etc.
Please note: As of September 2023, students may use the Absence Declaration on ACORN *one time per term* to report an absence and request consideration. Any subsequent absence will require a Verification of Illness form or other similar relevant documentation.
Students who do not submit their requests and documentation within 2 days may receive a grade of 0 (zero) on the missed course deliverable.
Students who follow the above procedures may have their individual midterm marks reallocated to the final assessment, and missed weekly homework marks to the rest of the weekly homework assignments. If you fail to provide the required documentation, you will be assigned a mark of zero. There will be no make-up midterm assessment or weekly homework.
Late Assignments
Group assignment is due on the date to be announced later in class or on the course webpage. Late submissions will normally be penalized by 20% if the assignment is not received on the specified date, at the specified time. A further penalty of 10% will be applied to each subsequent day. Students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit the assignment by its deadline must obtain approval from the instructor for an extension on a case by case basis. Supporting documentation will be required as per the policy on tests and assignments.
Course Participation & Contribution
Course participation is important to your understanding of the material. Discussion is an essential part of learning, and it is also the most interesting way to conduct a class. In addition,
4
class participation will enhance your presentation and communication skills, which will help you in recruiting and in your career.
Class participation is not graded but is highly encouraged. There are multiple ways to participate, including but not limited to participating during class sessions, and posting on discussion board (questions, answers/response to other students’ questions, etc.).
You will not be penalized for wrong answers to the questions raised in class/on discussion board. To facilitate class participation, you are required to put your name in front of you in every class.
Statement on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or harassment against any persons or communities.
Commitment to Accessibility
The University is committed to inclusivity and accessibility, and strives to provide support for, and facilitate the accommodation of, individuals with disabilities so that all may share the same level of access to opportunities and activities offered at the University.
If you require accommodations for a temporary or ongoing disability or health concern, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please email Accessibility Services or visit the Accessibility Services website for more information as soon as possible. Obtaining your accommodation letter may take up to several weeks, so get in touch with them as soon as possible. If you have general questions or concerns about the accessibility of this course, you are encouraged to reach out to your instructor, course coordinator, or Accessibility Services.
Ouriginal
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University’s plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the University’s use of this tool are described on the University's Plagiarism Detection Tool FAQ page from Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation.
Generative AI / ChatGPT
Students may use artificial intelligence tools for creating an outline for an assignment, but the final submitted assignment must be original work produced by the individual student alone.
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the U of T degree that you earn will continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences and the
5
penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments
• Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
• Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
• Making up sources or facts.
• Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed individually).
On test and exams
• Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
• Looking at someone else's answers.
• Misrepresenting your identity.
• Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation
• Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
• Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to) medical notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any questions about what is or is not permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other U of T or RC resources such as the RC Centre for Professional Skills, the College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre.
Email
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by email. As such, all U of T students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up and properly entered on ACORN. For more information visit the Information Commons Help Desk.
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Gmail or other type of email account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Gmail accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder.
Recording Lectures
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit permission and may not do so unless permission is granted. Students who have been previously granted permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are
6
excepted. This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus materials, etc.
If permission for recording is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to “publish” them in any way. It is forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a website or sell them in any other form without formal permission.
Other Useful Links
• Become a volunteer note taker
• Accessibility Services Note Taking Support
• Credit / No-Credit in RSM courses
• Rotman Commerce Academic Support
URL links for print
• ACORN: http://www.acorn.utoronto.ca/
• Email Accessibility Services: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca
• Accessibility Services website: http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/as
• University's Plagiarism Detection Tool FAQ: https://uoft.me/pdt-faq
• The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm
• Information Commons Help Desk: http://help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html
• Become a volunteer note taker: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/program/volunteer-note-taking/
• Accessibility Services Note Taking Support: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/service/note-taking-support/
• Credit / No-Credit in RSM courses: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/degree-requirements/credit-no-credit-option/
• Rotman Commerce Academic Support: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/academic-support/
• Book an appointment with a writing or presentation coach: http://uoft.me/writingcentres
• Writing and Presentation Coaching academic support page: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/academic-support/writing-and-presentation-coaching/
• Centre for Professional Skills Teamwork Resources page: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/teamwork-resources
• Book an appointment with a Teamwork Mentor: http://uoft.me/writingcentres
RSM220 – Fall 2023 Weekly Class Schedule (subject to revision)
Class
Week of*
Topic
Textbook Readings
Weekly HW
1
Sept. 11
The Canadian Financial Reporting Environment
Ch.1
2
Sept. 18
The Conceptual Framework Underlying Financial Reporting
Ch. 2
Practice HW
3
Sept. 25
Measurement and Accounting Theory
Ch. 3
HW #1
4
Oct. 2
Financial Position and Cash Flows
Ch. 5, Appendix 5A
HW #2
5
Oct. 9
Reporting Financial Performance
Ch. 4
HW #3
Oct. 16
Mid-term Test
Exact date and time to be announced
6
Oct. 23
Revenue Recognition
Ch. 6
HW #4
7
Oct. 30
Cash and Receivables
Ch. 7
HW #5
Nov. 6
November 6 - 10:
No Classes (Reading Week)
8
Nov. 13
Inventory
Ch. 8
HW #6
9
Nov. 20
Property, Plant, and Equipment: Accounting Model Basics
Ch. 10
HW #7
10
Nov. 27
Depreciation, Impairment, and Disposition
Ch. 11
HW #8
11
Dec. 4
Intangible Assets
Ch. 12
(excludes “Goodwill”)
*For Sections L0301 and L0401: Classes start the week of September 4; All topics are covered in the corresponding previous week.
Please note that the last day you can drop this course without academic penalty is November 6, 2023.
RSM220 – Fall 2023 Tutorial Schedule (subject to revision)
Week of
Tutorial Topics
Sept. 11
No Tutorial
Sept. 18
No Tutorial
Sept. 25
Journal Entry review
Oct. 2
Statement of Cash Flow
Oct. 9
Reporting Financial Performance
Oct. 16
No Tutorial (Week of Mid-term)
Oct. 23
Revenue Recognition
Oct. 30
Receivables
Nov. 6
No Tutorial (Reading Week)
Nov. 13
Inventory
Nov. 20
PPE 1
Nov. 27
PPE 2
Dec. 4
No Tutorial