DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
MGT428H5S LEC0101
Management Control
Course Outline - Winter 2024
Class Location & Time Mon, 09:00 AM - 11:00 AM IB 200
Instructor Jenny Gao
Office Location
Office Hours
E-mail Address jenny.gao@mail.utoronto.ca
Course Web Site https://q.utoronto.ca
Course Description
Management control includes all the processes and systems, many accounting-based, by which key managers allegedly ensure that
resources are acquired and used effectively and efficiently in the accomplishment of an organization's goals. The case method is
used to provide an understanding of the issues and environment of management control. [24L]
Prerequisite: MGT323H5
Exclusion: MGAD40H3 or RSM422H1 (SSc)
Distribution Requirement: SSc
Course Objective
The overall objectives of the course are two-fold. First, after taking the course, students should develop a solid understanding of
management control framework. Management control systems must be integrated with an organization's goals and strategy. A good
management control system aims at facilitating the execution of an organization's business strategy. Second, after taking the
course, students will obtain basic skills in assessing the effectiveness of a management control system in the organizational context.
The design of a management control system consists of many choices and options and not all of them are equally effective in
different business environments and organizational contexts.
This course is designed to broaden and deepen your conceptual and technical understanding of management control systems
(MCS). MCS are considered broadly to include everything that managers do to ensure good performance or, more specifically, to
ensure that the company's strategies get implemented effectively. But the emphasis in the course is on financial controls, which
dominate in importance at managerial levels in all but the smallest organizations. Using financial controls requires managers to
make decisions about: (1) responsibility structures (e.g., cost centers, profit centers), (2) performance measures (e.g., market,
financial, and/or nonfinancial measures and their combinations), (3) performance evaluations, which take into consideration
performance targets or other benchmarks, and (4) rewards (including performance-dependent compensation).
Discussions in class will not be limited to the case or articles assigned for the week. Discussions can also include any topic, issue or
event that is relevant to management control in a broad sense.
Cases are used in most sessions and students will be required to present one case in class as part of a team of students during the
term. The cases are both a learning tool for the class as well as for each presenting student team. The cases tend to be focused on the
subjects that are being discussed in that session and have the major objective of enforcing the learning of the subject matter and
illustrating the use of the subject in real life. The cases are all real companies, which allows the students presenting the case in class
to relate the time period and events in the case to the present-day situation of the organization and its competitors.
A final objective of the course is to give students a chance to practice their oral and written presentation skills, as well as their
ability to work effectively in a group.
Textbooks and Other Materials
Materials will also be distributed on Quercus.
Students are expected to read the required for the week BEFORE coming to class.
The focus of most of the classes will be on discussions of cases. The readings are intended to provide background that is useful for
informing the case discussions. For each case assignment, I will provide some Discussion Questions. These questions are intended
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 1 of 9
Type Description Due Date Weight
Presentations Student-led case discussion (Group) On-going 20%
Class Participation Participation (Individual) On-going 15%
Assignment Weekly case submissions and peer evaluations (Individual) On-going 35%
Final Exam Final exam (Individual) TBA 30%
Total 100%
to help frame and focus your reading and consideration of the course materials. Class discussion will normally go beyond these
questions.
Assessment and Grading Policies
Note that the Course Schedule, Assessment and Grading Policies detailed in this course outline are contingent on class delivery
staying unchanged. The course outline may change at the instructors' discretion under unforeseeable circumstances, e.g. lockdown
due to COVID. For example, if we are required to offer courses via remote delivery during the semester, the instructor will make
the necessary adjustments, including, but not limited to, the nature and timing of assignments and tests, reweighting of course
assessments, and other course content. These changes will be communicated via Quercus.
Requirements and Criteria
Student-led Case Discussions
To develop presentation and communication skills, there will be groups presenting cases in class. The instructor will select the
groups, with each group consisting of around 3 to 5 students depending on class enrolment. Each group will be assigned a case in
the first class. In general, plan for a 45-minute presentation. Handouts, overheads, etc. are encouraged and are the responsibility of
the presenting group.
Groups are encouraged to meet with the instructor to discuss their preparations for the presentation. It is advisable to carry out
further research beyond the required readings to make the presentation more interesting and insightful. Innovations in presentation
style and organization that will enhance the understanding of the issues and facilitate class participation are especially encouraged.
Each group is required to hand in a hard copy handout of PowerPoint slides (if applicable) to the instructor before the class, and to
upload the PowerPoint slides immediately after the presentation. The first slide should clearly list the names of all group members
and the last slide should list the key references and important information sources, if applicable.
Groups are responsible for their internal management, but the instructor is always available for consultation if difficulties
persist. It is each student's responsibility to communicate with the other members of the group. In cases where it is clear that an
individual has made little or no contribution to the group work, the instructor reserves the right to adjust that individual's mark on
the group part of the project grade to a mark less than that given to the group as a whole. For example, in a situation in which no
contribution has been made, a mark of zero will be given.
Further guidelines on the student-led case discussion, including how it will be graded, will be posted on Quercus.
ALL STUDENTS are expected to have read the material assignment for that week. This includes the case for the week,
irrespective of whether your group is presenting that week or not. Everyone is expected to have read the required readings and the
case and to have prepared the assigned discussion questions before coming to class. You should be able to ask intelligent questions
and make constructive comments about the case.
Weekly Case Submissions
This course is structured to optimize student-to-student learning. As a fourth-year student, you are expected to not only learn from
the interactions with other students in the class, but also constructively contribute to the learning of other students. This places a
significant responsibility on each student to take each week's class seriously and prepare for each class.
Questions will be posted each week on Quercus relating to the cases under discussion that week. One or two questions will be
assigned to each student on a random basis. The length of the answers depends on the questions, but answers are generally about
one page (500 words max) in length.
Students must submit their answers for the case for the week to Quercus by Sunday midnight prior to Monday's class.
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 2 of 9
The answers will be graded based on the quality of the answers, the insight shown by the student and the application of theory to the
case as appropriate.
Students who are responsible for leading the week's case discussion do not have to take part in the weekly, but can if they want to.
The final grade will be based on the highest seven marks for the weekly hand-ins.
Class Participation
This course is case-based with extensive reading requirements. The best way to learn from cases and to address practical issues in
management control is through open debate and discussion in class to share our views and insights. Everyone is expected to have
read the required readings and the case and to have prepared the assigned discussion questions before coming to class. You can
participate by answering my questions or questions from other students in class, by raising relevant questions about the case, or by
participating in a discussion during the presentation.
Some things the instructor will consider in allocating a participation mark are:
Are the points that are made relevant to the discussion with respect to increasing understanding, or do they merely restate
case facts, but not in support of good, interesting ideas?
Do the comments take into consideration ideas offered by others earlier in the class, or are they points in isolation? Good
comments often (but of course not always) tend to reflect not only good preparation, but also good listening, interpretation,
and integration skills. In other words, do the comments move the conversation forward?
Do the comments distinguish among different kinds of data: facts; opinions; assumptions; inferences?
Do the comments reflect a thorough knowledge of the case and its details?
To encourage all students to participate, the instructor will randomly select students from the class list to answer questions and
provide comments on specific issues during class.
Some students may feel anxious or even intimidated to speak openly in class. The best way to overcome this anxiety is to prepare
well before the class. You can take a brief note of key facts in each case and write down any issues or questions you may have
when reading the article or the case. You can also attempt to answer the discussion questions listed in the course outline for each
class. That way, you will be able to ask relevant questions and contribute to class discussion. You can also achieve a better
understanding of the key learning points from each case or article.
Finally, to facilitate the instructor's assessment of class participation, students are asked to bring a name card to each class and place
the card in front of them.
Class participation will be assessed based on the quality of the comment, not the quantity, and how these comments relate to the
ongoing discussion. CLASS ATTENDANCE ALONE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE CLASS PARTICIPATION.
Final Exam
Please note that your final exams for this course will be written on a laptop computer in the classroom. You will therefore need to
bring a laptop computer to class for your final exam. If you do not have access to a laptop for your final exam, please email me at
jenny.gao@mail.utoronto.ca by January 15, 2024 at the latest so that I can arrange a laptop for you to borrow for the Final Exam. I
will confirm with you on January 30, 2024 that the Department has a laptop for you to borrow for your final exam. If you do not
hear from me by then, please follow up with me by midnight on January 30.
The final exam will cover all topics and issues we discuss in this course. It is an open book and will consist of a case similar to the
cases discussed in class each week, plus questions relating to the topics and cases discussed each week.
The best way to prepare for the final examination is to carefully read the required readings and prepare for the assigned discussion
questions for each class. and participate in class. It is not a good strategy to skip classes and wait until the last week to prepare for
the final examination.
Conduct of Class
Punctuality: Please be on time for class as coming late or leaving early will disturb the class.
Class Structure: Most classes will consist of a discussion of the case and topic of the week. The discussion will be led by a group
of students. (see Student-led Case Discussion above).
Class Preparation: Please note that there is a significant amount of reading required for this course. It is the student's
responsibility to do all the readings. There will be a minimal amount of "lecturing of the theory" of topics from the textbook.
Students are therefore required to study the textbook on their own.
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 3 of 9
A significant amount of the learning in this course will come from interaction with your peers. As fourth-year students, you
have obtained enough skills and knowledge to constructively contribute to the learning of your peers. This means that you
have an important responsibility to make quality contributions to the course.
Keep in mind:
(a) Usually there are no perfectly good management control systems or perfectly bad management control systems.
(b) Studying good systems is useful since we can learn what makes them good.
(c) Studying poor management control systems is also (perhaps even more) useful, since we can learn a lot from failures.
(d) Weaknesses exist in even a good management control systems.
(e) Weaknesses should be evaluated relative to resources (money; talent; etc.)
(f) Recommendations for change should be accompanied by implementation recommendations. Costs (both easy-to-measure and
hard-to-measure) as well as benefits (again both easy and hard to measure) should accompany each suggestion for change.
Contacting the Instructor by Email: The instructor works during normal business hours. Students can expect a response to emails
within 1 to 2 business days. If you haven't heard back within that time frame, check your spam folder and then send a brief followup
query if necessary. Please follow professional norms when sending emails and use your UToronto e-mail address. In the subject
link, make sure your email starts with "[MGT428H5S] ...".
Procedures and Rules
Special Consideration Request for Academic Accommodation Request - Missed Tests & Quizzes (term work only, no final
exams):
To be considered for academic accommodation for missed tests and quizzes (ONLY), please follow the appropriate next steps
depending on your circumstance (i.e. illness related or non-illness related). Do NOT submit a petition for final exams. Final exam
deferrals must be submitted through the Registrar's Office. Extension of time requests should follow the same process.
Special Consideration Request Application: https://uoft.service-now.com/utm_scr
Illness or Non-illness Related Next Steps
1. Inform your professor in writing (e-mail is acceptable) no later than 24 hours after the test or quiz date of any
circumstances that prevent you from writing a test or quiz. Failure to do so will result in your special consideration request
petition being denied.
2. Submit an online Special Consideration Request as soon as possible, but no later than 72 hours after the test or quiz
date. Failure to do so will result in your request being denied. Special Consideration Request Application:
https://uoft.service-now.com/utm_scr
3. Provide your supporting documentation on the Special Consideration Request Application by attaching screenshots
or relevant documents within one week of the missed test/quiz. Supporting documentation may include a screenshot of
the Absence Declaration tool on ACORN. Please ensure the dates identified in your absence declaration include the actual
test or quiz date, if applicable. Please refer the course outline for term work exclusions from use of Absence
Declaration. The Department requires supporting documentation (such as Verification of Illness form) if your course
outline excludes test/quiz from the one-time ACORN declaration. Illness related documentation include the Verification
of Illness form which must be in English and completed by a practitioner registered and licensed in the Province of
Ontario with original signature and business stamp. Non illness related documentation will vary but a death in the family
requires submission of a death certificate. Requests without supporting documentation will be denied.
IMPORTANT
Failure to follow this process will result in your Special Consideration Request being denied.
If your form is not completed correctly with the necessary details to assess your Special Consideration Request, your
request may be denied.
In the case of an illness, you need to follow the specific Missed Tests requirements for your course (see Missed Tests
section below).
You may receive a follow up email or response on the Special Consideration Request Application from the UTMM
petitions committee. If so, you MUST respond within 24 hours.
If there is concern about your Special Consideration Request, your request may be refused and/or you may be asked to meet
with an Associate Chair or Program Director.
If you have multiple Special Consideration Requests your request may be refused.
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 4 of 9
If you do not complete the make-up work as and when required, you will receive a grade of zero for the original missed
test; further special consideration is not permitted.
Holidays and pre-purchased plane tickets, family plans (unless critical, such as death of an immediate family member), your
friend's wedding, lack of preparation, or too many other tests are not acceptable excuses for missing a quiz, a test, or an item of
course work.
The written explanation and documentation that you submit represents an appeal from you, which requests the opportunity to
account for that portion of your grade in an alternate manner than the normal one that is described in this course outline. If an
appeal is not received by the deadline specified above, or if the appeal is deemed unacceptable, you will receive a grade of zero.
Late Assignment(s):
The individual components of the weekly assignments are due at the times indicated above. No late assignments will be accepted.
The weekly assignment grade will be based on the seven highest weekly grades. Students can therefore choose to not complete a
maximum of four weekly assignments without any penalty. If a student cannot complete a weekly assignment for any reason, it
will count towards the four weekly assignments that the student can choose not to complete.
Final Exams:
Students who cannot complete their final examination due to illness or other serious causes must file an online petition within 72
hours of the missed examination. Late petitions will NOT be considered. Upon approval of a deferred exam request, a nonrefundable
fee is required for each examination approved. See the Office of the Registrar Administrative Fees for Services page for
more information.
Academic Misconduct:
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the
University of Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats
cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and
the process for addressing academic offences. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
Making up sources or facts.
Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
On tests and exams:
1. Using or possessing unauthorized aids.
2. Looking at someone else's answers during an exam or test.
3. Misrepresenting your identity.
In academic work:
1. Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
2. Falsifying or altering any documentation required, including (but not limited to) doctor's notes.
Students should note that copying, plagiarizing, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student caught
engaging in such activities will be subject to academic discipline ranging from a mark of zero on the assignment, test or
examination to dismissal from the university as outlined in the academic handbook. Any student abetting or otherwise assisting in
such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties.
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University's plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual
similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in
the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the
University’s use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation web site (https://uoft.me/pdt-faq).
Standard of Conduct in this Course:
Since this course is part of a degree designed to give you a broad understanding of the world of business, we aim to run the course
in a way which will be consistent with the world of business - where many of you will spend your working lives. We strive to
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 5 of 9
provide accurate information, quality materials and good service, consistent with our obligations to maintain the high academic
standards of the Department of Management at the University of Toronto Mississauga.
In return we expect that you will conduct yourself in a way that prepares you for the world of work.
We start on time, so please do not arrive late and disrupt others.
Leaving class early is also disruptive to your colleagues and will not be permitted unless you have made prior arrangements
with the instructor.
Turn off your cell phone.
Keep up to date. Make sure that you know the class schedule. Check on the course web page for updates and posted
materials.
During the class, respect the learning opportunities of others. Don't distract others by chatting to your neighbour. Our
expectation is that you will not only contribute in class to your own learning, but also that of others.
Remote assessments:
1. Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments.
2. Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment.
3. Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
4. Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual "course groups."
5. Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters . If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources .
Copyright Notice:
Please be advised that the intellectual property rights in the material referred to on this syllabus and posted on the course site may
belong to the course instructor or other persons. You are not authorized to reproduce or distribute such material, in any form or
medium, without the prior consent of the intellectual property owner. For example, uploading course assignments or solutions to
Coursehero, Easy Edu, and other tutoring sites and services is strictly prohibited. Violation of intellectual property rights may be a
violation of the law and University of Toronto policies and may entail significant repercussions for the person found to have
engaged in such act. If you have any questions regarding your right to use the material in a manner other than as set forth in the
syllabus, please speak to your instructor.
Additional Information:
U of T statement on commitment to equity, human rights, and respect for diversity
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning
environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can
express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or
harassment against any persons or communities.
UTM statement on academic integrity
UTM wishes to remind students that they are expected to adhere to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters regardless of
the course delivery method. UTM expects that students will maintain the same academic honesty and integrity both in a
classroom setting and online. Potential academic offences related to digital contexts include, but are not limited to:
Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments.
Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment.
Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual "course groups."
Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters . If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources.
RGASC
The Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre (RGASC) is located in Room 3251 on the third floor of the Maanjiwe
nendamowinan Building. The RGASC offers individual consultations, workshops (many CCR-accredited), and a wide range of
programs to help students identify and develop the academic skills they need for success in their studies. In Winter 2022, their
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 6 of 9
programming will include both in-person and online options. Visit the RGASC website to explore their online resources, book
an in-person or online appointment, or learn about other programming such as Writing Retreats, the Program for Accessing
Research Training (PART), Mathematics and Numeracy Support, and dedicated resources for English Language Learners.
UTM Library's
UTM Library - The University of Toronto Library provides access to a vast collection of online and print resources to faculty,
staff, and students and is the largest academic library in Canada. The UTM Library offers Reference and Research Help inperson
and also virtually, through chat, Zoom, and individual research consultations, to help students navigate library
databases, find relevant articles for their research, and cite correctly. The Library Workshops and Events help students learn
about the search techniques and specialized software, needed to be successful in their academic journey. For more information,
visit http://library.utm.utoronto.ca.
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 7 of 9
Date Topic
2024-01-08 Week 1: INTRODUCTION
Introduction to the course
Course expectations and logistics
Overview of management and control
No preparation needed for this class
2024-01-15 Week 2: GENERAL MANAGEMENT CONTROL
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Westchester Distribution
This case discussion will be led by the instructor.
2024-01-22 Week 3: RESULTS CONTROLS
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Atlanta Schools: Measures to Improve Performance
This discussion will be led by Group A
2024-01-29 Week 4: ACTION AND PERSONNEL CONTROLS AND CONTROL SYSTEMS TIGHTNESS
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
This discussion will be led by Group B
2024-02-05 Week 5: CULTURE CONTROL
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Patagonia, Inc.
This discussion will be led by Group C
2024-02-12 Week 6: INCENTIVES & MYOPIA
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Janalakshmi Financial Services' HR Dilemma
This discussion will be led by Group D
2024-02-19 Week 7: READING WEEK
2024-02-26 Week 8: INCENTIVES & MYOPIA
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Southern California Edison
This discussion will be led by Group E
Course Schedule
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 8 of 9
2024-03-04 Week 9: FRAUD
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Punjab National Bank - The Modi Fraud-System Failure or People Failure
This discussion will be led by Group F
2024-03-11 Week 10: CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Readings: See Quercus
Case: Governance Failure at Satyam
This discussion will be led by Group G
2024-03-18 Week 11: ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL & GOVERNANCE - SOCIAL
Readings: See Quercus
Case: De Beers Canada - The Attawapiskat Context
This discussion will be led by Group H
2024-03-25 Week 12: ETHICS
Readings: See Quercus
See course website for discussion questions and possible further readings
Case: Fiji Water & Corporate Social Responsibility
This discussion will be led by Group I
2024-04-01 Week 13: NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
Readings: See Quercus
Discussion: Management control at the University of Toronto - the good, bad and ugly and how you would
change it.
This discussion will be led by Group J
TBA Final Examination
Last Date to drop course from Academic Record and GPA is March 11, 2024.
The Course Schedule above is subject to change due to the constantly evolving nature of COVID public health measures. Please
check Quercus and emails regularly for any changes to the proposed schedule.
MGT428H5S - Gao, Jenny 2024-01-04 18:54:45 Page 9 of 9