DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
MGT453H5S LEC0101
Marketing Research
Course Outline - Winter 2024
Class Location & Time Wed, 03:00 PM - 05:00 PM DH 2080
Instructor Hemant Sangwan
Office Location
Office Hours By appointment
E-mail Address h.sangwan@utoronto.ca
Course Web Site https://q.utoronto.ca
Teaching Assistant Rddhi Chhabra
Office Hours By appointment
E-mail Address rddhi.chhabra@mail.utoronto.ca
Course Description
Marketing research is studied from the perspective of the marketing manager. The course focuses on the initiation, design, and
interpretation of research as an aid to marketing decision making. Case studies and projects are used to provide students with some
practical research experiences.
Prerequisite: MGT353H5 and [MGT218H5 or ECO220Y5 or ECO227Y5 or STA218H5 or (STA256H5 and STA260H5) or
(STA256H5 and STA258H5)]
Exclusion: MGMC01H3 (SSc)
Distribution Requirement: SSc
Course Objective
The objectives of this course are:
1. Identify opportunities for marketing research when faced with marketing challenges
2. Write marketing research objectives derived from marketing research problems
3. Design research instruments (e.g., surveys, focus group guidelines, etc.) to support marketing research questions
4. Conduct secondary research in adherence with academic integrity guidelines
5. Evaluate research methods to support business objectives
6. Assess ethical and privacy concerns in marketing research and business situations
7. Analyze data using marketing research and statistical techniques
8. Prepare a market research brief, with secondary research support, a timeline and budget constraints that adhere to ethical
guidelines
9. Present research results, limitations, and recommendations to stakeholders
Textbooks and Other Materials
Required
Textbook: Essentials of Marketing Research. Joseph F Hair, David J Ortinau, Dana E Harrison. McGraw Hill. Sixth
Edition. ISBN: 978-1-26-6261503
Materials posted on Quercus (e.g., slides, articles, links, videos, etc.)
Recommedned
Market Research Industry Trend report (GRIT Report) https://www.greenbook.org/grit
The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacytopics/
privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/
U of T Library: Marketing Research Reports https://guides.library.utoronto.ca/c.php?g=250479&p=1670803
Business Development Bank of Canada: https://www.bdc.ca/en
Assessment and Grading Policies
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 1 of 9
Type Description Due Date Weight
Class Participation In-class discussion, online discussion board, course reflection On-going 8%
Assignment Online module on Research Ethics (TCPS 2 certification) 2024-01-23 2%
Term Test Term Test-1 2024-02-14 17%
Term Test Term Test-2 2024-03-20 18%
Term Test Term Test-3 (Cumulative) 2024-04-03 25%
Assignment Group Project -Part 1 (Proposal) 2024-02-06 5%
Assignment Group Project -Part 2 (Final Report) 2024-03-26 20%
Presentations Group Project -Part 3 (Presentation) 2024-03-27 5%
Total 100%
Note that the Course Schedule, Assessment and Grading Policies detailed in this course outline are contingent on class delivery
staying unchanged. The course outline may change at the instructors' discretion under unforeseeable circumstances, e.g. lockdown
due to COVID. For example, if we are required to offer courses via remote delivery during the semester, the instructor will make
the necessary adjustments, including, but not limited to, the nature and timing of assignments and tests, reweighting of course
assessments, and other course content. These changes will be communicated via Quercus.
Requirements and Criteria
In-class discussion, online discussion board, course reflection (8%)
Discussion is an important element of learning and case analysis, and this makes class participation a critical component of
students' leaning experience. Participation is all about building a learning community and it will be your contribution to this
community that counts. The instructor's role during a case discussion is that of a facilitator and moderator. In the classes, we are
less concerned with "right" or "wrong" answers than we are with thoughtful contributions, which follow the discussion and either
add to the debate or move it in a new direction. Furthermore, we do not want to have a situation where everyone is competing for
airtime: this works against building a learning community.
Although everyone will be encouraged to participate, students may be called on randomly during the discussions. E.g., I
may ask a student a follow-up question in response to another student's answer.
You should generally speak up in class. Try to have something valuable to say in at least one case discussion session. You
should be aware that good participation means quality of participation, as opposed to quantity. Airtime is limited, so please
do not talk for the sake of talking. The following questions will be considered in grading participation:
Do comments interpret or integrate case facts using theories, concepts, and analytical tools presented in the readings and
lectures?
Can the participant provide insights on why certain market phenomena (that are being discussed in class) are observed?
Further, can he/she add to the concepts discussed in class with suitable examples?
Can the participant show the ability to challenge the concepts discussed in class by giving counter examples/reasons?
Is the participant an effective communicator? i.e., comments presented in a concise and convincing manner.Does the
participant listen to other comments? Is the participant able to build on and evaluate other comments? Does the participant
learn from and show respect for other speakers and their points of view?
There will be a discussion board topic for certain weeks where students need to write their point of views (PoVs) on a given topic.
The topic could be related to analytics / decision-making / methodology, and the PoVs should reflect your position on the given
topic and/or suggestions to a specific problem, and not a Yes/No type of response. The objectives of the discussion board topic is to
learn from each other's PoV, develop critical thinking, and take a position on a given topic based on logic, knowledge, and personal
preferences. The PoVs are not "right" or "wrong" and present an opportunity to show creativity, analysis, and ability to critically
examine a situation and ask meaningful questions.
One of the discussion board topics would be about course reflection, where students need to write key learnings from the course,
their experience with completing discussion board activities, and if they completed these activities in a gradual timely manner or all
at once!
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 2 of 9
Online module - TCPS 2 (Course on Research Ethics) 2%
There will be an online module on Research Ethics. The modules will require students to read/watch content on a specific topic
(e.g., consent, fairness, equity, research ethics, etc.) and then answer a set of MC / short answer questions related to the topics.
The module can be freely accessed at https://tcps2core.ca/welcome
Once a module is completed (3-5 hours), the platform will provide a certificate of completion - indicating the name of the student,
and the date of completion.
Students need to submit the certificate of completion as a PDF file on Quercus by the due date as proof of completing the modules.
No other proof will be accepted.
Individual term tests (17% + 18% + 25%):
There will be three term tests, worth 17%, 18%, and 25% of the total weight of the course. The tests will be in the form of (MC / TF
/ and/or short answer questions / and or mini case-based scenarios). The term test-3 will cover ALL the topics discussed in the
course (cumulative). Specific details will be provided in advance during the class discussion / and will also be posted on Quercus.
Students are not expected to consult with each other or take external help regarding the concepts and principles asked in tests.
Group project (5%+ 20%+ 5% = 30%)
Students will form groups of four to six people and complete a group project assignment. There will be three parts for the group
assignment - part 1 (proposal, 5%), part 2 (final report, 20%), and part 3 (presentation, 5%).
In the group project, students will collaborate with others to learn, discuss, and come up with specific solutions and
recommendations to a set of business problems involving Marketing Research.
The groups will be formed based on mutual consensus among students and/or the instructor can also advise about the same.
The data / materials / articles used for group projects can be sourced/suggested by students and / or provided by the instructor. In all
cases, the students need to take a formal/informal approval from the instructor before finalizing data and start working on the
project. Additional details/ specific information about each part will be discussed during the class/ and will also be posted on
Canvas well in advance.
Group project - part 1 (proposal, 5%): In this part students will analyze the business situation to formulate the problem,
finalize key objectives and propose a plan to meet the business objectives (PPTX format)
Group project - part 2 (final report, 20%): In this part, students will execute the plan proposed in part 1 based on
authentic research and analysis, present the findings, and provide key recommendations to the stakeholders in a form of a
professional business report (PPTX format)
Group project - part 3 (presentation, 5%): In this part, students need to present their findings, either live in class or in a
form of a pre-recorded professional business video presentation. The video presentation must be based on slides, with a
flexibility of adding some creativity (animation, visuals, etc.) which enhances the appeal of the presentation. Specific
details will be provided in advance during the class discussion/ and will also be posted on Quercus.
Peer Assessments: As part of the group project, you (individual and confidential) may be asked to submit a form
describing contributions of each team member (including yours), overall experience working with the team, and highlight
any area for improvement in the future. In addition, you need to communicate with the instructor, in a timely manner, any
concerns which can negatively affect the timeline/overall experience of working in the group.
The expectation is that each member in the group will contribute their fair share to the best of their abilities and not engage
in "free riding" behaviour. It is perfectly fine to have differences with your team members on ideas, working plans, etc. and
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 3 of 9
you need to manage those differences based on mutual discussion with your team members in a professional manner. The
instructor will not micromanage day-to-day operational issues of working in the group project. However, if there is credible
evidence that a member is completely missing from the work or making marginal or not meaningful contribution to the
group work, it will reflect in grades for that member.
Conduct of Class
Course Format and Expectations
The course is composed of a great deal of active discussion on your part during lectures. The purpose of the lectures is to present
and discuss theories, concepts, analytical techniques, and empirical findings. We will discuss many examples and cases with the
goal of applying the concepts in real-world contexts.
You are expected to do each week's assigned readings before coming to class.
Everyone is expected to be present and fully prepared during live sessions. If you miss a class, please let the instructor (and the TA)
know about it well in advance, including a brief explanation for your absence.
As professional undergraduate courses, standards of professional conduct in the classroom apply, and the classroom should be
treated as a professional business setting. This includes:
1. Timeliness: do not arrive late and disrupt others. Leaving class early is also disruptive to your colleagues and will not be
permitted unless you have made prior arrangements with the instructor.
2. Keep your phone silent and do not engage in the use of phones or laptops in class for purposes other than classroom
learning.
3. Be prepared for class, including completion of all preparatory activities, and be prepared to participate.
4. During the class, respect the learning opportunities of others. This includes exhibiting respect and openness to your
classmates and colleagues, their experiences, and their viewpoints.
Communication: For any course related inquires (e.g., grades, clarifications, contents, etc.), please email the TA, cc the instructor
and add the course code in the subject line.
Remarking / Re-Grading: Requests to have assignments / deliverables remarked would be considered if ALL the following
conditions are met:
The request is made within 4 working days of grades posted and available on Quercus.
The student (or all members of the group in case it is a group assignment) submits with his/her request a written
explanation as to why and where he/she believes he/she is entitled to more marks.
The instructor has no reason to believe the student has made any changes after the assignment being returned.
If I accept your re-marking request, we will regrade the entire assignment. Hence, the final grade of the assignment can go
either up or down or stays the same.
Procedures and Rules
Special Consideration Request for Academic Accommodation Request - Missed Tests & Quizzes (term work only, no final
exams):
To be considered for academic accommodation for missed tests and quizzes (ONLY), please follow the appropriate next steps
depending on your circumstance (i.e. illness related or non-illness related). Do NOT submit a petition for final exams. Final exam
deferrals must be submitted through the Registrar's Office. Extension of time requests should follow the same process.
Special Consideration Request Application: https://uoft.service-now.com/utm_scr
Illness or Non-illness Related Next Steps
1. Inform your professor in writing (e-mail is acceptable) no later than 24 hours after the test or quiz date of any
circumstances that prevent you from writing a test or quiz. Failure to do so will result in your special consideration request
petition being denied.
2. Submit an online Special Consideration Request as soon as possible, but no later than 72 hours after the test or quiz
date. Failure to do so will result in your request being denied. Special Consideration Request Application:
https://uoft.service-now.com/utm_scr
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 4 of 9
3. Provide your supporting documentation on the Special Consideration Request Application by attaching screenshots
or relevant documents within one week of the missed test/quiz. Supporting documentation may include a screenshot of
the Absence Declaration tool on ACORN. Please ensure the dates identified in your absence declaration include the actual
test or quiz date, if applicable. Please refer the course outline for term work exclusions from use of Absence
Declaration. The Department requires supporting documentation (such as Verification of Illness form) if your course
outline excludes test/quiz from the one-time ACORN declaration. Illness related documentation include the Verification
of Illness form which must be in English and completed by a practitioner registered and licensed in the Province of
Ontario with original signature and business stamp. Non illness related documentation will vary but a death in the family
requires submission of a death certificate. Requests without supporting documentation will be denied.
IMPORTANT
Failure to follow this process will result in your Special Consideration Request being denied.
If your form is not completed correctly with the necessary details to assess your Special Consideration Request, your
request may be denied.
In the case of an illness, you need to follow the specific Missed Tests requirements for your course (see Missed Tests
section below).
You may receive a follow up email or response on the Special Consideration Request Application from the UTMM
petitions committee. If so, you MUST respond within 24 hours.
If there is concern about your Special Consideration Request, your request may be refused and/or you may be asked to meet
with an Associate Chair or Program Director.
If you have multiple Special Consideration Requests your request may be refused.
If you do not complete the make-up work as and when required, you will receive a grade of zero for the original missed
test; further special consideration is not permitted.
Holidays and pre-purchased plane tickets, family plans (unless critical, such as death of an immediate family member), your
friend's wedding, lack of preparation, or too many other tests are not acceptable excuses for missing a quiz, a test, or an item of
course work.
The written explanation and documentation that you submit represents an appeal from you, which requests the opportunity to
account for that portion of your grade in an alternate manner than the normal one that is described in this course outline. If an
appeal is not received by the deadline specified above, or if the appeal is deemed unacceptable, you will receive a grade of zero.
Missed Test(s):
Missed Tests and Assignments
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may request special consideration
within the timeline specified by the school.
If you miss any assignment or term test-1 for unforeseen reasons and submit appropriate documentation, you could be asked to
submit your work late, as decided by the instructor. In a situation, when you are not able to submit the assignment within 2 weeks
of the original deadline, your grades will be reweighted based on your performance in the remaining individual assignments
(provided you submitted necessary documents explaining your reasons for not submitting it).
You must take both term test 2 and term test 3. If you miss either term test 2 or 3 or both - you must take makeup tests and you can
be assigned additional work in the form of individual assessments (e.g., reviewing a paper, assignment, or any combination of
these, etc.)
Late Assignment(s):
Please note that all assignments are due by the specified deadlines. The exact date and time will be given in the Quercus
assignment. No late assignments will be accepted, except for students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit
an assignment by its deadline and must obtain approval from the instructor for an extension. Supporting documentation will be
required as per the policy on missed tests and assignments.
Late assignments, when it requires electronic submission, will carry a 20% grade penalty per day. No exceptions!
Academic Misconduct:
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the
University of Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats
cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 5 of 9
the process for addressing academic offences. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
Making up sources or facts.
Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
On tests and exams:
1. Using or possessing unauthorized aids.
2. Looking at someone else's answers during an exam or test.
3. Misrepresenting your identity.
In academic work:
1. Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
2. Falsifying or altering any documentation required, including (but not limited to) doctor's notes.
Students should note that copying, plagiarizing, or other forms of academic misconduct will not be tolerated. Any student caught
engaging in such activities will be subject to academic discipline ranging from a mark of zero on the assignment, test or
examination to dismissal from the university as outlined in the academic handbook. Any student abetting or otherwise assisting in
such misconduct will also be subject to academic penalties.
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University's plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual
similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in
the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the
University’s use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation web site (https://uoft.me/pdt-faq).
Standard of Conduct in this Course:
Since this course is part of a degree designed to give you a broad understanding of the world of business, we aim to run the course
in a way which will be consistent with the world of business - where many of you will spend your working lives. We strive to
provide accurate information, quality materials and good service, consistent with our obligations to maintain the high academic
standards of the Department of Management at the University of Toronto Mississauga.
In return we expect that you will conduct yourself in a way that prepares you for the world of work.
We start on time, so please do not arrive late and disrupt others.
Leaving class early is also disruptive to your colleagues and will not be permitted unless you have made prior arrangements
with the instructor.
Turn off your cell phone.
Keep up to date. Make sure that you know the class schedule. Check on the course web page for updates and posted
materials.
During the class, respect the learning opportunities of others. Don't distract others by chatting to your neighbour. Our
expectation is that you will not only contribute in class to your own learning, but also that of others.
Remote assessments:
1. Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments.
2. Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment.
3. Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
4. Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual "course groups."
5. Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters . If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources .
Copyright Notice:
Please be advised that the intellectual property rights in the material referred to on this syllabus and posted on the course site may
belong to the course instructor or other persons. You are not authorized to reproduce or distribute such material, in any form or
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 6 of 9
medium, without the prior consent of the intellectual property owner. For example, uploading course assignments or solutions to
Coursehero, Easy Edu, and other tutoring sites and services is strictly prohibited. Violation of intellectual property rights may be a
violation of the law and University of Toronto policies and may entail significant repercussions for the person found to have
engaged in such act. If you have any questions regarding your right to use the material in a manner other than as set forth in the
syllabus, please speak to your instructor.
Additional Information:
U of T statement on commitment to equity, human rights, and respect for diversity
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning
environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can
express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or
harassment against any persons or communities.
UTM statement on academic integrity
UTM wishes to remind students that they are expected to adhere to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters regardless of
the course delivery method. UTM expects that students will maintain the same academic honesty and integrity both in a
classroom setting and online. Potential academic offences related to digital contexts include, but are not limited to:
Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for assessments.
Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an assessment.
Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual "course groups."
Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected to be completed individually.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters . If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate
research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources.
RGASC
The Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre (RGASC) is located in Room 3251 on the third floor of the Maanjiwe
nendamowinan Building. The RGASC offers individual consultations, workshops (many CCR-accredited), and a wide range of
programs to help students identify and develop the academic skills they need for success in their studies. In Winter 2022, their
programming will include both in-person and online options. Visit the RGASC website to explore their online resources, book
an in-person or online appointment, or learn about other programming such as Writing Retreats, the Program for Accessing
Research Training (PART), Mathematics and Numeracy Support, and dedicated resources for English Language Learners.
UTM Library's
UTM Library - The University of Toronto Library provides access to a vast collection of online and print resources to faculty,
staff, and students and is the largest academic library in Canada. The UTM Library offers Reference and Research Help inperson
and also virtually, through chat, Zoom, and individual research consultations, to help students navigate library
databases, find relevant articles for their research, and cite correctly. The Library Workshops and Events help students learn
about the search techniques and specialized software, needed to be successful in their academic journey. For more information,
visit http://library.utm.utoronto.ca.
Generative AI / ChatGPT
This course policy is designed to promote your learning and intellectual development and to help you reach course learning
outcomes.
Students may choose to use generative artificial intelligence tools as they work through the assignments in this course; this
use must be documented in an appendix for each assignment. The documentation should include what tool(s) were used,
how they were used, and how the results from the AI were incorporated into the submitted work.
Students may use artificial intelligence tools for creating an outline for an assignment, but the final submitted assignment
must be original work produced by the individual student alone.
Representing one's own ideas, or expression of an idea, that was AI-generated may be considered an academic offence in
this course. Students are ultimately accountable for the work they submit.
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 7 of 9
Date Topic
2024-01-10 Introduction to Marketing research - Managerial decision making.
Marketing research process and proposal
Textbook Chapters 1,2
2024-01-17 Qualitative research - exploratory, interaction, and observation based
Textbook Chapter 4
Due: Group formation
2024-01-24 Quantitative research - descriptive, predictive, and causal
Marketing research with secondary data and research
Textbook Chapters 3,5
Due: Jan 23rd - TCPS 2 Core certification (2%) https://tcps2core.ca/welcome
2024-01-31 Measurement and scaling
Textbook Chapter 7
2024-02-07 Questionnaire Design
Textbook Chapter 8
Due: Feb 6th - Group project, part 1 (5%)
2024-02-14 Term Test -1 (17%)
During the class time (Based on chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 + topics discussed in the class week 1-5)
2024-02-21 Reading Week - no class
2024-02-28 Sampling techniques and methods. Biases in sampling
Textbook Chapter 6
2024-03-06 Qualitative data analysis
Quantitative data analysis -1
Textbook Chapter 9, 10
2024-03-13 Quantitative data analysis - 2
Textbook Chapter 11, 12
2024-03-20 Term Test 2 (18%)
During the class time (Based on chapters 6, 9, 10, 11, 12 + topics discussed in the class week 9-11)
Course Schedule
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 8 of 9
2024-03-27 Due: March 26th: Group project - part 2 - Final report (20%)
Due: March 27th: Group Project - part 3 - Presentation (5%)
2024-04-03 Term Test-3 (25%, Cumulative, ALL topics covered in the course)
During the class time.
Last Date to drop course from Academic Record and GPA is March 11, 2024.
The Course Schedule above is subject to change due to the constantly evolving nature of COVID public health measures. Please
check Quercus and emails regularly for any changes to the proposed schedule.
MGT453H5S - Sangwan, Hemant 2024-01-04 18:55:33 Page 9 of 9