1
Course Outline
RSM 493 H1 F
Entrepreneurship DRAFT
Fall 2020
Course Meets: Wednesdays, 1:00 to 3:00 pm
Course Delivery: The class time is listed as 1-3 pm (Toronto time) and you should keep this time free for a synchronous class. Most synchronous sessions will begin at 1:30 to give you 30 minutes to review the class material and get your online presence set up. The last three classes (of student presentations) may begin at 1 pm, and you will be given plenty of notice of this. Some synchronous classes will end at 2:30 and some at 3:00. There will be no synchronous class on Wednesday Nov 18 and Wednesday Nov 25.
Instructor: Becky Reuber
Email: becky.reuber@rotman.utoronto.ca
Webpage: https://q.utoronto.ca
Office Hours: Online, by appointment
Teaching Assistant: Eugenia Vovk
TA email: eugenia.vovk@utoronto.ca
Course Scope and Mission
“You miss 100% of the shots you never take.” – Wayne Gretzky
This course is all about “taking shots”. You will be an entrepreneur for a term. Entrepreneurs and their firms are celebrated by the media and their communities. But what does it take to develop a new venture concept? The major emphasis in the course is a real world hands-on approach to learning what it’s like to pursue an entrepreneurial opportunity. You will pitch venture ideas, research the market for your product or service, prepare marketing and launch plans, develop financial projections, and prepare a business plan. This course will be directly useful for those with an interest in starting a new business or working in a start-up environment; and provide an “entrepreneur’s view” for those planning to work in banking, finance, or consulting.
The learning outcomes of the course are to sharpen your ability to:
1. Communicate professionally in online forums;
2. Pitch opportunities for new ventures;
3. Recognize and analyze new venture opportunities from the viewpoints of the entrepreneur and potential stakeholders;
4. Participate meaningfully in discussions about new ventures and their development;
5. Participate in the process of preparing a persuasive business proposal for a new venture;
6. Determine if you could (or should) become involved in a business start-up.
2
Course Prerequisite
RSM392H1 Strategic Management
Statement on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where all members of our community can express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or harassment against any persons or communities.
Required Technology
For Fall-Winter 2020-21, this course will be conducted entirely online. To participate fully and to complete the course successfully, you must ensure you have a computer with a working webcam, microphone and reliable access to an internet connection. For further details, please visit this link: Recommended Technology Requirements for Remote/Online Learning
Required Readings and Reference Material
Class Material
The Course Package, containing six cases and three readings, can be purchased through Ivey Publishing here. You will need to log in or create an account. Access to your course pack via your Ivey Publishing account is for a period of 30 days from date of purchase. For help contact Ivey directly at 1-800-649-6355 or cases@ivey.ca. This course pack is for your personal use only and is not to be shared or distributed in any form. It will cost a total of $xx.xx. The use of these materials complies with all University of Toronto policies which govern fees for course materials.
The rest of the course material is available free-of-charge. It is posted on Quercus, and is also available online directly through links on this outline. Sometimes the library’s link to an article changes, and so in case that happens, I’ve given you enough information to be able to retrieve it through a search or help from library staff. Additional material may be posted on Quercus throughout the semester.
Library and Online Resources
While working on your business plans, you will need to access resource material outside of the course readings. The Milt Harris Library (formerly called the BIC) at Rotman has set up a list of online resources for this course (e.g. the Canadian Intellectual Property Office and Industry Canada sites), which you can access here or through the Entrepreneurship Course Resources page on Quercus. If you’re having trouble finding relevant information, I recommend contacting Sean Forbes at the Milt Harris Library (sean.forbes@rotman.utoronto.ca) or the University of Toronto’s dedicated entrepreneurship librarian, Carey Toane, at the Gerstein Science Information Centre (carey.toane@utoronto.ca). When requesting research support, please give as much detail as possible about the space you’re interested in (e.g. industry and/or competitor companies of interest (if you know them), your geographical scope, the type of information you’re looking for (e.g. market size, valuations, industry norms, etc.)) and where you’ve already looked for information. Carey has developed a site which compiles lots of valuable information for entrepreneurs, so go there first: http://guides.library.utoronto.ca/entrepreneurship .
3
Evaluation and Grades
Grades are a measure of the performance of a student in individual courses. Each student shall be judged on the basis of how well they have command of the course materials.
Work Wt Due Date
Individual
Idea Fair Commentary 10% September 16 to 30
Opportunity Description & Assessment 10% Oct 1 (Description); Oct 7 (Assessment)
Class Prep Assignments 20% Ongoing
Class contribution 20% Ongoing
Team Work on Business Plan
Market Presentation 5% November 4
Slide Deck 20% December 1
Video Presentation 10% December 1
Business Plan Commentary 5% December 2/3 or December 9/10
Course Format and Expectations
This course will challenge you to shift from being a receiver of ideas, facts, concepts, and techniques. Instead you will generate ideas, analyze and evaluate alternatives, and formulate workable action plans. The goal is to put what you have learned in other courses and from past experience into practice.
This course requires you to develop and present a business plan for a new venture. Towards this end, the course is divided into two parts.
Part 1: You’ll work individually on generating and screening venture concepts. Good venture opportunities don’t just happen, they emerge from an iterative process of recognition, research, reflection and refinement. So that you get to understand this process better, each of you should start a Business Idea Diary, keeping track of your ideas for new ventures. It will probably contain a mix of ideas that you’ve rejected, ideas that you’ve explored a little and are ambiguous about, and ideas that you think might be viable. In recording and evaluating your ideas, the screening criteria that you’re implicitly using will emerge. It is useful to write these down. You are likely to reject many of your ideas very quickly, and so the description of these ideas will be brief. You should spend more time exploring the ideas that pass your (perhaps unconscious) screening criteria. In order to assess them more thoroughly, talk about the most promising ideas with people who know you well, with people who are knowledgeable about the industry, and with potential customers. Bring your diary to the first few classes. It will not be handed in and will not be graded. In the two-week period from Class 1 to Class 3, you should post a description of your two most promising ideas on the Idea Fair Discussion Board of Quercus so that you can get feedback on them from classmates. You’re not limited to two ideas, if you think of better ones. You are not graded on the ideas you post, but you will be graded on the feedback you provide on your classmates’ ideas. In Class 2, you will post a brief description of your best two ideas on Quercus and get feedback on them from your classmates; you will also provide feedback to your classmates on their ideas (see below under Idea Fair Commentary).
Part 2: You’ll work in a team with the objective of developing a business plan for a new venture concept. You should keep in mind that this is ultimately an educational exercise which must be completed during a one-term course. However, your finished product will be better and the
4
process will be more fun if you treat your venture as real. There are few restrictions on the type of venture you may consider, although it must be legal and ethical. Most ventures developed in this course are both new and independent, but you can consider an acquisition (with a substantial turnaround planned) or a corporate venture (“intrapreneurship”). Your venture must be innovative and have the potential to create wealth beyond a “normal” salary for its founders.
Note: Real estate development ventures, retail businesses (e.g. restaurants), and certain service businesses (e.g. investment funds and management consulting ventures) will not be permitted for this course. This protects you because their quality is only manifested in their operation, and so they are very difficult to grade as a class project. If in doubt, please check with the instructor.
Transition from Part 1 to Part 2: As in the real world, resources are scarce and at most 8 business ideas in each section can be “funded” with presentation time. (There are no exceptions to this, so please don’t ask.) This means that we need a mechanism to go from the venture ideas posted by individuals in the first three weeks to the venture concepts worked on by teams starting in Class 5. It also means that you may not be able to work on your own business idea and you may not be able to pick the team you work with.
The day after Class 3, each student will submit a one-page description of their best opportunity to Quercus. We will compile these into a Compendium of Opportunity Descriptions, which will be shared with the class. Each student should go through the compendium and think about which venture concept they would most like to work on, and submit the Opportunity Assessment in Class 4. After completing your Opportunity Assessment, you can decide whether or not you want to become a CEO of the venture formed around the business idea you pitched. If you do, you need to recruit other people to your management team who will work with you to develop this venture idea during the rest of the course. You’ll recruit them into a specific management role. If you don’t wish to continue developing the idea, or if you are unable to attract a sufficiently large number of people to work with you, you need to be recruited into a management role on another student’s team. The Compendium and online discussion threads will help you decide what ventures are most attractive.
It is expected that teams will be made up of 5 people, but I will confirm this after Class 4 once the actual enrolment in your section is known. In all cases, the minimum team size will be 2. All teams need to be approved by Class 5 (October 14).
Business Plan FAQ
Q: What if I do not have a brilliant idea?
A: First, don’t despair. Whether any idea is brilliant or not will only become clear over time. Second, there are many more ideas for businesses than can possibly be realized. If you set aside a few minutes each day for thinking about ideas, or if you engage in regular brainstorming with your friends, you’ll get plenty of ideas. Third, even if your team doesn’t pursue your idea, you will still get to enjoy the pleasure and pain of developing a new venture concept.
Q: What if after working on the venture idea for a few weeks we realize that the idea is not quite as brilliant as we originally thought?
A: In most cases, more analysis and research than is possible in this course will be required to determine the ultimate feasibility and quality of the opportunity. Nonetheless, the project will give you a good idea of what it takes to turn an idea into a successful business venture. It is expected that your initial business idea may change, sometimes substantially, by the time it is
5
researched and developed. However, should you find out through analysis that your business is really infeasible or economically unattractive, this would be a respectable course outcome. At least now you know what will not work – a great insight that will spare you time, talent, and money in the future.
Q: What is the course policy on non-disclosure agreements and intellectual property protection?
A: Sometimes students ask to be excused from pitching a business idea in case someone takes their idea, and/or they would like the instructor or other students to sign a non-disclosure agreement. In order to preserve an open, academic environment with the free exchange of ideas, I am not able to accommodate these requests.
In this class you are entirely responsible for protecting your own IP. If there is any part of your business idea that you would not like to disclose, then you should simply not disclose it. Obviously, any material not disclosed cannot be evaluated for grading. If you are concerned about disclosing your ideas, then it would be prudent to work on someone else’s business idea during the course. Completing a business plan on another idea will enable you to develop your own more effectively and efficiently afterwards. If you have any questions about this policy, do not hesitate to ask.
Graded Components
A detailed description of the Opportunity Description, the Opportunity Assessment and the four part of the Business Plan Deliverable is available on Quercus. The three other graded items of the course are described below.
Idea Fair Commentary
It is important for entrepreneurs to get feedback on their early venture ideas. In order to facilitate this process, each of you will post your best two ideas on Quercus as early in the course as you can, so that your classmates can comment on them.
We are using the Discussion facility of Quercus to do this. To post your business ideas, click on Discussion Board on the left hand side. You'll see that we’ve set up a Forum called Idea Fair. Click on this and you can Create a Thread describing your venture idea. You should name your idea (by the thread Subject field) and provide a description that is brief but that provides enough information so that people can provide useful feedback. Your classmates will be able to comment on your idea by clicking on the thread subject and then clicking on Reply. Two comments about posting. It is easier to give feedback, and to interpret the feedback you get, if you create a different thread for each idea. Also, you don't need to put your name on the thread title because the system automatically inserts it.
You will not be graded on the information you post on your own ideas, but it is in your interests to be informative: the richer the information you post, the better the feedback you will be able to get on it. You will be graded on your online commentary on your classmates’ ideas. I’m going to look at the commentary posted on people’s individual ideas until the end of the day on September 30. I do not expect that you will comment on each idea posted; I expect you to comment on the ideas where you can add value and that you do so multiple times. I am looking for thoughtful, constructive comments that help your classmates develop their ideas. These can be new angles or perspectives that frame an idea and the opportunities and challenges associated with it in a new light. They can also be follow-ons to ongoing conversations. Don’t shy away from disagreeing with previously posted comments, but disagree respectfully. Your Idea Fair commentary will be graded on the basis of the quality and quantity of your feedback.
6
Class Preparation Assignments
The synchronous portion of this course relies on discussion. To encourage preparation for this discussion, there will be a Class Prep Assignment for many classes. This requires you to submit a short (300 words or less) answer to a pre-specified question indicated by an asterisk (*) on the class schedule. We will use the Survey function of Quercus to do this. Each Class Preparation Assignment is due at 9pm on the Monday before class. Responses will be taken off Quercus at the time due, and late responses will not be accepted. I am looking for smart and thoughtful comments. It is better to be focused and succinct than to be long-winded. The most important part of these preparation assignments is that they will help you contribute your own analysis, conclusions, and recommendations during in-class discussion. You can submit only one answer, so I recommend pasting it from a Word document to ensure that it says what you intend it to say.
Class Contribution
In a typical class, one or more class members will be asked to start the session by addressing a specific question. After a few minutes of initial analysis and recommendations, I will open the discussion to the rest of the class. Because of the varied backgrounds of people in the class, my experience is that the discussion is often improved if we bring in a variety of opinions by calling on people other than those who volunteer. If you do not wish to be called on during a class, please let me know before class.
While you are expected to be an active participant throughout the course, the frequency of your participation in class is not the only criterion for assessing your class contribution: the quality of your participation is most important. Criteria I will use to assess this quality include:
 Is the participant a good listener?
 Are the points made relevant to the discussion? Are they linked to the comments of others?
 Is there willingness to test new ideas or are all comments “safe” (for example, repetition of case facts without analysis or conclusions)?
 Do comments lead to a clearer statement of the concepts being covered and the problems being addressed?
A few points I want to emphasize:
 Well-posed questions are not only a legitimate way to interact, but should be an important part of the discussions.
 Because of the varied backgrounds in the class, many of you will have important contributions to make based on your personal experience. I will try to learn about your backgrounds over the course of the term, but you are encouraged to bring these experiences to bear on the analysis of the issues discussed.
 Disruptive class behaviour (e.g. flipping your audio or video on and off; not being present when called upon) will negatively affect your contribution grade.
Please let me know ahead of time if you will miss a class. Also note that I have a “no excuses” policy regarding absences—I trust you to use your own judgment about your reasons for missing class and whether you can afford to do so. Your class contribution grade will suffer directly for every absence beyond one missed class. Use this “free” absence as you like (job interview, illness, personal matters, religious holidays). You may choose any day for a free absence except a day when you present.
Class contribution includes not only in-class discussion, but also Quercus posts, surveys and quizzes as listed in the Weekly Schedule, and participation in polls and chat on BB Collaborate.
7
Online Communication
An important learning objective of this course is to increase your comfort and effectiveness in communicating professionally through online mechanisms. I expect this to be increasingly important in your professional lives, even after the pandemic. I have therefore designed the course to have a synchronous discussion on most weeks, and have set the assignments so you get practice with communicating online in diverse ways.
Presentation Skills
The ability to deliver a slide deck effectively is essential to professional success. It is very common for people to have a fear of public speaking and so an important objective of this course is to provide lots of opportunities to practice, through a short presentation before Fall Reading Week, and a formal presentation at the end of the course. Through the Rotman Commerce Centre for Professional Skills, each team will get in-depth, personalized feedback on their first presentation, which will help them deliver a better final presentation.
Written Assignments:
Please note that clear, concise and correct writing will be considered in the evaluation of all written coursework. You may lose points for writing that impedes communication: poor organization, weak paragraph development, excessive wordiness, hard-to-follow sentence structure, spelling mistakes and grammatical errors. Students who require additional support and/or tutoring with respect to their writing skills are encouraged to visit the Academic Success Centre (http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/asc) or one of the College Writing Centres (writing.utoronto.ca/writing-centres). These Centres are teaching facilities – not editing services – where trained staff can assist students in developing their academic writing skills. There is no charge for the instruction and support.
Rotman Commerce Centre for Professional Skills Teamwork Support:
The business plan project requires students to work in teams of five. Working as a team is challenging; this is true both in the real world and in your academic classes. However, learning to work together in teams is an important aspect of your education and preparation for your future careers. You are encouraged to review the teamwork resources available to all Rotman Commerce students at https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/teamwork-resources while navigating these challenges, but keep in mind that supports are also available for when you think you may need extra help.
New in the 2020-2021 academic year, the Rotman Commerce Centre for Professional Skills (RC-CPS) will offer appointments with Teamwork Mentors for any teams encountering challenges in their teamwork. Some possible reasons you might book an appointment with a Teamwork Mentor include:
- Team members have identified constraints on their time, work or accommodations they require that conflict with necessary timelines for the team.
- Teams are unsure how to divide their workload for a team project.
- Teams are concerned about how to integrate the individual contributions of each member and how to ensure team members are contributing equally.
- Teams are concerned about how to ensure all group members are aware of academic integrity guidelines (e.g. properly attributing sources) and follow them.
- Teams would like to be able to communicate more effectively with each other, particularly when navigating a remote work academic environment.
8
To book a meeting with a Teamwork Mentor, send an email to rotmancommerce.teamworkhelp@utoronto.ca with the course code (e.g. RSM100) and team number (if available) in the subject line of the email. Any member of the team may reach out individually to book an appointment, but we also encourage teams to book their appointments as a team. You will normally receive a response within 24-36 hours, but note that during busy times of the semester the waiting period may be longer. Be proactive in booking your meeting, and do so as soon as challenges arise!
If you are a student registered with Accessibility Services, and extensions are one of your academic accommodations, you should consult with your Accessibility Advisor about this course. For considerations pertaining to teamwork and accessibility, please see information in the section on Accessibility Needs below under the Policies and Procedures heading.
Weekly Schedule
All times in this syllabus are expressed as the time in Toronto. If you are not in the same time zone as Toronto, you will need to convert the times to your own time zone.
You are expected to have read the assigned reading before class unless explicitly stated otherwise.
An asterisk after a sentence indicates that this is a Class Preparation Assignment and you should provide a 150-300 (maximum) word response by 9 pm on the Monday before class.
Class Date Topic Deliverables Readings
1
Sept 16
Course Overview
Prep: What interests you about new ventures and why? *
Quiz: Before class, complete the quiz on the course outline (on Quercus).
Post: Start posting (at least two) business ideas to the Idea Fair on Quercus so you can get feedback on them. Until Sept 30 you should monitor and comment on the ideas posted by other students.
2
Sept 23
Recognizing Opportunities
Prep: Look through the business ideas posted on Idea Fair (on the Quercus Discussion Board) by your classmates. Identity two characteristics that make an idea seem promising to you and give examples of ideas with those characteristics.*
 Buchanan, L. How Great Entrepreneurs Think, Inc. Feb 2011
9
Prep: Complete the short personal survey.*
3
Sept 30
Screening Opportunities
Prep: Rank the 4 product concepts Russo is considering for TabletTeach and state the primary driver of your ranking.* What other information would you like to have in order to rank them?
Due: Opportunity Description (due 1 pm Thurs Oct 1, Quercus)
 Hedlund, M. Why Wesabe Lost to Mint, Oct 2010
 Sull, D.N. Disciplined Entrepreneurship. MIT Sloan Management Review, Fall 2004
Case: TabletTeach
4
Oct 7
Discovering the Market
Prep: What actions were undertaken by Rent the Runway’s co-founders in the first year (Nov 2008-Nov 2009), and how were they relevant to trying to find product-market fit? *
Due: Opportunity Assessment (due 1:15 pm, Quercus)
 Note on Market Research (course pack)
 Customer Visits for Entrepreneurs (course pack)
Case: Rent the Runway
5
Oct 14
Acquiring Resources
Prep: What do you like and dislike about the Anomalie business concept?*
Due: Teams should be formed by today.
Read about the 12 Magic Slides (Getty, Apress, 2014)
 Wedding dress customizers Anomalie raises $13M as bridal stores crumble. TechCrunch June 25, 2019.
 Case: Redesigning the wedding dress experience: A podcase with Leslie Voorhees and Calley Means of Anomalie
6
Oct 21
Obtaining Financing
Prep: Which offer should Rose and Wise accept and why?*
Due: Concept Development Worksheet (team, ungraded) (October 22; 11 pm; Quercus)
 RTR video on acquiring venture capital: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AlL32GUOqmI
 Startup raises more than it hoped for
 Financing Entrepreneurial Ventures (course pack)
 Case: Lovepop
7
Oct 28
Growth and Exit
Prep: Should Beekeeper focus on a single vertical (“go deep”) or maintain the breadth of verticals (“go broad”), and why?*
 Learn about RTR’s success to-date from online videos and articles:
o Fortune video 2014
o New Relic video 2015
o Forbes article 2017
o TechCrunch article 2019
 Hambrick, D.C. & Crozier, L.M. Stumblers and Stars in the
10
Management of Rapid Growth. Journal of Business Venturing, 1985
 Case: Beekeeper
8
Nov 4
Market Presentation
(class starts at 1 pm)
Due: Market Presentation
Teams give a 5-minute report on their market. Feedback and suggestions are crowdsourced from the class through Chat (and included as class contribution).
9
Dec 2
Business Plan Q&A
We will watch the 12-minute videotaped presentations beforehand asynchronously, and in class we will have a live 20-minute Q&A session for each plan discussed that day (half discussed in each class). The Q&A will initially be led by the team doing a commentary on the plan, and will then be opened up to the class. The commentary on another team’s plan is due at 9 am on the day following their presentation.
Due:
Business Plan Slide Deck: Tues Dec 1 @ 9 am
URL for Business Plan Video Presentation: Tues Dec 1 @ 9 am
Commentary: December 3 or December 10 @ 3 pm (roughly 24 hours after the presentation you’re commenting on)
10
Dec 9
Business Plan Q&A
Please note that the last day you can drop this course without academic penalty is November 9, 2020.
Policies and Procedures
Missed Tests and Assignments (including mid-term and final-term examinations)
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) may request special consideration.
In such cases, students must:
1. Notify the instructor AND the Rotman Commerce Program Office on the date of the missed course deliverable, e.g. missed test, final assessments, assignment or class (in the case of participation marks).
2. Complete a Request for Special Consideration Form and submit it along with supporting documentation this may include either your Self-Declaration of Absence on ACORN, or Verification of Student Illness or Injury form to the Rotman Commerce Office within 2 business days of the originally scheduled course deliverable.
Students who do not provide appropriate or sufficient supporting documentation will be given a grade of 0 (zero) for the missed course deliverable.
Note that documentation must clearly establish that you were ill or had other circumstances that prevented you from attending on the date in question. After-the-fact reports are not sufficient.
11
If as student is excused from doing the Opportunity Description or Assessment, he or she can make it up by handling it in the following week. The other individual pieces of work are distributed over multiple weeks, and so a missed week can be made up by increased effort during the other weeks.
Late Assignments
All assignments are due at the time and date specified in the course outline and on Quercus. Late submissions will be penalized by 20% if the assignment is late by 48 hours or less. After 48 hours, late assignments will not be accepted. Students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit an assignment by its deadline must obtain approval from the instructor for an extension. Supporting documentation will be required as per the policy on missed assignments. The individual Class Prep Assignments count for very little individually and will not be accepted late under any circumstances.
Accessibility Needs
The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility. If you require accommodations for a temporary or ongoing disability or health concern, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible at accessibility.services@utoronto.ca or studentlife.utoronto.ca/as.
For courses with deliverables that require you to work in teams, please note the following. If you are a student registered with Accessibility Services, and extensions are one of your academic accommodations, requests for extensions impact everyone in the group. As a result, requests for late submissions of any component of teamwork will require compelling reasons, advance notice, and must work for everyone in the team. You are encouraged to discuss with your course instructor, Accessibility Advisor, and other team members what you need in order to successfully complete your coursework. Additionally, the Rotman Commerce Centre for Professional Skills offers Teamwork Mentors (see section above) who can help you and your team discuss how to support you effectively and how to develop a work plan that meets the needs and constraints of all team members.
Volunteer Notetaking
If you’re interested in helping to make our classroom more accessible, volunteer to be a notetaker!
Accessibility Services needs dependable volunteer notetakers to assist students living with a disability to achieve academic success. All you have to do is attend classes regularly and submit your notes consistently.
1. Register online as a Volunteer Note-Taker at:
https://clockwork.studentlife.utoronto.ca/custom/misc/home.aspx
2. Follow the link that says “Volunteer Notetakers”
3. Select your course and upload a sample of your notes
4. Once you have been selected as a notetaker, you’ll get an email notifying you to upload your Notes.
If you have any questions or require assistance, please email as.notetaking@utoronto.ca or call 416-978-6186.
12
Volunteers may receive co-curricular credit or a certificate of appreciation.
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectively, responsibly and fairly in this academic community ensures that the U of T degree that you earn will continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
 Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
 Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the instructor.
 Making up sources or facts.
 Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed individually).
On test and exams:
 Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone.
 Looking at someone else's answers
 Misrepresenting your identity.
 Submitting an altered test for re-grading.
Misrepresentation:
 Falsifying institutional documents or grades.
 Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to) medical notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any question about what is or is not permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other U of T resources such as College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre.
Email
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by email. As such, all U of T students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up and properly entered on ACORN. For more information visit help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html.
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Gmail or other type of email account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Gmail accounts are filtered as junk
13
mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder.
Quercus and the Course Page
The online course page for this course is accessed through Quercus. To access the course page, go to q.utoronto.ca and log in using your UTORid and password. Once you have logged in, you will be at the Quercus Dashboard. On this page you will see all of the courses you are presently enrolled in. If you don’t see the course listed here but you are properly registered for the course in ACORN, wait 48 hours.
Recording Lectures
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit permission, and may not do so unless permission is granted. Students who have been previously granted permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are excepted. This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus materials, etc.
If permission for recording is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to “publish” them in any way. It is forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a website or sell them in any other form without formal permission.
FIPPA Language
Notice of video recording and sharing (Download and re-use prohibited)
This course, including your participation, will be recorded on video and will be available to students in the course for viewing remotely and after each session.
Course videos and materials belong to your instructor, the University, and/or other sources depending on the specific facts of each situation, and are protected by copyright. Do not download, copy, or share any course or student materials or videos without the explicit permission of the instructor.
For questions about recording and use of videos in which you appear please contact your instructor.