Sociology 318H1S
Theories of Stratification
Winter 2024
Class Hours: Mondays 10:10 AM-1 PM
Professor: Jonathan Horowitz
Email: jonathan.horowitz@utoronto.ca
Office Hours: TBD
TA: Zhen Wang
Office Hours: TBD
To book appointments on Zoom: Use Quercus Scheduling Tool
To go to office hours: Click “Office Hours” in navigation menu on Quercus.
Goals of this course
Why do some people have more resources than others? Who winds up at the top of hierarchies, and who winds up at the bottom? These are the primary questions for the study of stratification, and some of the most important questions in all of sociology. In this course, we focus on two of the core issues in the stratification literature: Status attainment and gender inequality. In addition, we will cover several other topics briefly: Rents, poverty and the welfare state, networks, and racial inequality.
By exploring the key questions of social stratification, you will learn how to do the following:
1) Identify how different arguments about social inequality relate to each other
2) Reconcile conflicting evidence about the same issue
3) Find cutting-edge research to answer a key question regarding social stratification
4) Organize and present key issues in a coherent and organized way
Requirements
Before taking this class, you are required to take SOC201H1 (Classical Sociological Theory), SOC202H1 (Introduction to Quantitative Methods in Sociology), and SOC204H1 (Introduction to Qualitative Methods in Sociology, plus two of the following (1.0 FCE): SOC251H1 (Contemporary Sociological Theory), SOC252H1 (Intermediate Quantitative Methods in Sociology), or SOC254H1 (Intermediate Qualitative Methods). Students without the required pre-requisites will be removed at the time the deficit is discovered.
Before the Semester Begins:
Required Texts
You can access most of the required texts at the following link:
Grusky, David and Szelényi, Szonya. (Eds.). (2011). The inequality reader: Contemporary and foundational readings in race, class, and gender. Westview Press.
The remaining readings are available via a link called the Library Reading List on Quercus.
Things you need to know to succeed in this class
You will need to have regular access to a word processor (like those found in Microsoft Office, LibreOffice, or Google Docs) and strong, reliable internet for this class. You will spend a great deal of time searching for peer-reviewed journal articles and reading them this semester. You will do small-group work during class time.
Statistical literacy is a necessary skill for this course. You won’t need to perform statistical analyses, but you will be reading many studies that involve multiple regression analysis. Most students who have completed the introductory quantitative methods course have the background to succeed in this class, but if you have concerns please contact me before the beginning of the semester to discuss your statistical background.
This class is cumulative. After completing the assigned readings, you will complete a reading notes worksheet before class, and sometimes will search for a peer-reviewed research article on the same topic. After completing the reading notes worksheet and finding peer-reviewed research articles, you will come to class and we will use your reading note answers in class. These will be practice for your assignments and final paper. Working hard at the earlier stages (assigned readings, worksheets, and reading notes) will result in far better performance in the later stages of the class (assignments and the final paper).
This class uses an active learning model. Lectures are short and the focus is on peer discussion groups. Students learn far more in active learning courses when compared to regular lecture classes, but it also can be a strange experience for students who are used to lectures. Students have typically enjoyed this course because the course project involves asking a question that you find personally interesting, but it may be less familiar at first.
Artificial Intelligence Tools
The use of generative artificial intelligence tools or apps for assignments in this course, including tools like ChatGPT and other AI writing or coding assistants, is prohibited.
Academic Integrity
Students are expected to know and adhere to the University’s principle of academic integrity. Any act of unethical behavior will be addressed in accordance with University guidelines. In general, you are expected to do your own work and not provide unauthorized help to other students. These include, but are not limited to:
• Sharing answers to assignments, including on social media, email, or in person
• Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment including having someone re/write or add material to your work
• Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including doctor’s notes
• Plagiarism, of any kind
In general, please read the statement of academic integrity carefully and thoroughly to make certain you understand and adhere to it. Clarifying questions—as they pertain to this class—are welcome. Resources regarding plagiarism can also be found here: https://onesearch.library.utoronto.ca/faq/how-do-i-avoid-plagiarism.
In Between Each Class:
Preparing for Class
You will usually complete “reading notes” for each week. I will write additional material for you to read that provides important information about each reading. You will also write down some important information in a summary format and will create a set of notes for you that are easy to reference when completing the assignments. Finally, on most days you will complete at least one “Pre-Class Activity” which will lead into our activity for the day. Approximately 80% of the assigned readings are in the first half of the semester.
Completing assigned readings and reading notes are essential for success in this course. You will find that our class exercises and discussions involve your answers on the reading notes. Furthermore, the class exercises help you to practice for the written assignments. Make sure to complete the “Article Summaries” as well as the “Pre-Class Assignments”—this will help you on future assignments and prepare you for class.
This is a 300-level course, and the out-of-class workload reflects that fact. The readings are short but dense, and the graded assignments are also short but require a high level of comprehension. Although some students need more time than others, I suggest that you start preparing at least two days prior to the class meeting.
Contact Information
Email
You can reach me by email at jonathan.horowitz@utoronto.ca. I will handle all emails for this course. Feel free to contact me with requests, problems, or simple questions, but please read the syllabus before asking questions. All emails should be sent from your utoronto email account and should have SOC318 in the subject line. For more difficult questions, please come sign up for either of our office hours.
I have a policy of trying to answer every email within 48 hours. I am sometimes much faster than that, but sometimes I need all 48 hours to respond to an email. Thus, if you need to get in touch with us within 48 hours, we suggest asking us before or after class, or during office hours.
Office Hours
Office hours via Zoom are listed on the first page of this document. You are not burdening us by utilizing office hours—we have carved out that time specifically so you can come find us. Note that due to the pandemic, we are holding virtual office hours. Please sign up for an appointment on Quercus using the following guide: https://qstudents.utoronto.ca/why-the-calendar-tool-is-useful-for-students/. You can access our office hours by clicking the “Office Hours” link in the left-hand navigation menu on our course Quercus page.
The primary purpose of office hours is to help you better understand the course content. To make the best use of your time, you should be prepared with specific questions. For example, you might have a question about a reading you don’t understand, or a concept we’ve covered in class. Be as specific as you can about how we can help you. However, you are welcome to drop by for other reasons too we are happy to talk to you more about sociology, social stratification, research, or just about anything else that crosses your mind.
Week One
Please take note of the fact that you have four (short but dense) readings for the first day. This is strategically timed so that we can get reading out of the way before midterms. Please make sure you have read it.
During Each Class:
Rules of the Game
1. We start and end class on time. No packing up early.
2. Turn off cell phones, music players, and other hand-held devices.
3. You may use computers for course materials only. In general, you are on the honor system for this rule.
4. Check your utoronto email account daily.
5. If we are online, use the chat feature to contribute and mute your microphone. The exception to this in small groups, or if you are reporting back to the class from small group activities.
6. Give all other students respect for their efforts.
Attendance
Achieving success in this class requires consistent attendance. Please don’t schedule any appointments, trips, meetings, or other activities that would require you to miss class. If you know you’ll be out of town and must miss a class, please let us know ahead of time. Also, if an emergency comes up, please send us an email as soon as you can to let us know the reason for your absence.
Students who don’t show up to class and who don’t contact us are often dealing with extenuating circumstances that may require outside assistance. I tend to err on the side of caution in these situations; if you tend to miss class without explanation, I may contact the registrar at your home college.
Format
This class contains very little lecturing, and discussions/exercises are nearly always based upon the reading notes. The reading notes (particularly the Article Summaries and Pre-Class Assignments) help direct your attention to the most important themes in each day's reading, and thus you should bring them to class. Please fill out the reading notes to the best of your ability, as these will be invaluable resources for you later in the semester. We will also discuss the readings in class, and the notes will aid you in these discussions.
COVID-19 and Masking
Alhough university policy and the rest of Canadian society has mostly moved away from masking, I urge you to wear multi-layer masks covering your mouth and nose at all times during the course. Two-way masking is an incredibly effective method for stopping the spread of coronavirus—if both you and the person you are with are wearing a basic surgical mask, it can reduce the spread of COVID by up to 90%. It is important that individuals who have underlying health risks in this class (or such individuals who live with students in this class) are safe. Wearing a mask in enclosed spaces like classrooms is a sign of respect for others and an indication that you want everyone to participate regardless of underlying health conditions, and a critical component of inclusion in the present public health context. If you have trouble obtaining masks for use in the classroom, feel free to let me know and I can provide basic surgical masks free of charge; simply let me know and I will bring them.
Course Expectations and Evaluation
Course Assignments
1. Expectations Agreement (Mandatory)
On the first day of class, you will return the expectations agreement, indicating that you have read this syllabus thoroughly and agree to abide by the expectations within it.
2. Assignments A and B (46%)
For Assignments A and B, you will receive a two peer-reviewed articles that build on the major concepts in the course reading. You will evaluate how each article builds on arguments from earlier in the course, and critically evaluate the original argument using this new information.
3. Assignment Zero (1%)
You will turn in an assignment that has very similar questions to Assignments A and B. You will be graded on how well you followed the instructions.
4. Peer Review (3%)
At various points throughout the semester, you evaluate the arguments made by your peers. You will evaluate their assignment and provide written feedback to help improve their performance.
5. Literature Review (50%)
This assignment will be your primary responsibility during the second part of the semester. You will identify a key argument in the course readings that you find interesting or appealing, and then will assess the state of this theoretical position by researching peer-reviewed journal articles. This project will consist of five different stages: Identifying the argument; finding relevant peer-reviewed journal articles; reading and analyzing peer-reviewed journal articles; outlining your argument; and writing the final paper. You are encouraged to start on each stage as early as possible, and to contact your instructor or teaching assistant when you are struggling.
Note that there is no final exam for this course.
Late or Missed Assignments
If you are unable to turn in an assignment at the designated time for medical reasons, you must email me (not the TA) and declare your absence on ACORN. Also, please seek medical attention because your health is important.
For other reasons, such as family or other personal reasons, please contact your college registrar and have them email me. This is for your benefit, as your registrar will have resources that they can mobilize on your behalf.
Without permission from the instructor, a late assignment becomes a missed assignment. To avoid this, stay in touch with us. Do not wait until the last minute to tell us about any difficulties you are having, and please address personal issues with your registrar as they come up. The inability to turn an assignment in on time is almost always a symptom of a larger problem.
All assignments must be submitted in a format the instructor and TAs can read. We accept files in .doc, .docx, .pdf, .odf, and .rtf format. It is your responsibility to ensure that the file itself is readable, which can be confirmed by downloading the file once it is uploaded to the assignment submission page on Quercus. If we cannot read it, it will be marked missing.
Terms and Conditions That Apply
Ouriginal
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University’s plagiarism detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool’s reference database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that apply to the University’s use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation web site (https://uoft.me/pdt-faq).
For some of your assignments, we will be using the software Ouriginal. It uses text matching technology as a method to uphold the University’s high academic integrity standards to detect any potential plagiarism. Ouriginal is integrated into Quercus. For the assignments set up to use Ouriginal, the software will review your paper when you upload it to Quercus. To learn more about Ouriginal’s privacy policy please review its Privacy Policy.
Students not wishing their assignment to be submitted through Ouriginal will not be assessed unless a student instead provides, along with their work, sufficient secondary material (e.g., reading notes, outlines of the paper, rough drafts of the final draft, etc.) to establish that the paper they submit is truly their own.
Accessibility
The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility. If you require accommodations for a disability, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible: disability.services@utoronto.ca. Although we do not have in-class examinations if you need to contact them for this or another class you can find out more information about Accommodated Testing Services here: https://lsm.utoronto.ca/ats/.
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
Note on readings:
The peer-reviewed journal articles will almost always prove more challenging than readings in the Inequality Reader; budget your time accordingly. Readings are generally in the Inequality Reader (listed as G&S on the schedule). You should read the articles in the order in which they are listed. Note that approximately 80% of the assigned readings, reading notes, and pre-class activities are in the first half of the semester; you will be searching for and journal articles for your paper project in the second half. Please do not try to do all of the readings, notes, pre-class assignments, and assignments the day before class.
One further note, which we will periodically return to throughout the semester: The majority of theory regarding stratification comes from the United States context, and focuses on three main axes of stratification: Class, race, and gender. In general, the differences in stratification between Canada and the United States are in degree rather than kind—most things that we read about the United States are true for Canada, just not quite to the same degree. The big exception is race—where the United States has a unique history that does not apply to many other contexts. Thus, we talk primarily about status attainment and gender inequality in the present course, which holds in the Canadian context, and limit the discussion of racial inequality to topics where the prevailing theory applies.
Note on assignments:
Bolded assignments are graded.
Content
Reading
Assignment
1.8
Class Expectations (Intro)
Functionalism (Arguments)
Classses (Comparison)
1.1
• Davis & Moore (G&S, p16-19)
• Fischer et al (G&S, p20-24)
• Arguments Handout (Quercus)
1.2
• Wright (G&S, p48-55)
• Weber (G&S, p56-67)
Expectations Agreement
Notes & Pre-Class Activities 1
1.15
Rents (Arguments)
Reproduction/Mobility I (Causal Models)
2.1
• Sørensen (Quercus)
• OPTIONAL: Grusky and Weeden (G&S, p90-97)
2.2
• Blau & Duncan (G&S, p527-539, but ignore the technical parts from p533-539)
Notes & Pre-Class Activities: 2
Assignment Zero Due Wednesday 1.17 by 11:59 PM.
1.22
Social Psych. Models I (Causal Models)
Reproduction/Mobility II (Group Work)
Reproduction/Mobility II (Peer Review)
3.1
• Torche (Quercus)
3.2
• Sewell et al (G&S, p553-566)
Notes, Pre-Class Activities: 3
Peer Review 1 Due Wednesday 1.24 at 11:59 PM
Peer Review Article Due Thursday 1.25 at 5 PM
1.29
Constructing Gender and the Ideal Worker Norm (Arguments)
Social Psych. Models II (Peer Review)
Discuss Assignment A
4.1
• Your Peer’s Article
4.2
• Stone (G&S, p337-344)
• Lorber (G&S, p318-325, no notes needed)
• Hochschild (G&S, p326-331, no notes needed)
Discuss Assignment A
• Figwit’s Answer Sheet
Notes & Pre-Class Activities: 4
Peer Review 2 Due Wednesday 1.31 at 11:59 PM
Assignment A Due Friday 2.2 at 11:59 PM
2.5
Gender Discrimination I (Arguments)
Devaluation (Arguments)
Review Assignment A
Discuss Assignment B
5.1
• Correll et al (G&S, p365-377)
• Additional reading (See Reading Notes)
5.2
• England (G&S, 421-427)
Review Assignment A
Discuss Assignment B
Notes & Pre-Class Activities: 5
Assignment B Due Friday 2.9 at 11:59 PM
2.12
Writing a Literature Review
6.1
Paper Project: Part I
• Baumeister & Leary (Quercus)
• Synthesis Matrix (Quercus)
• Identifying the Argument (Quercus)
Notes & Pre-Class Activities: 6
Reading Week
2.26
Gender Discrimination II (Arguments)
Discuss Journal Articles
Review Assignment B
7.1
• See Reading Notes
Paper Project: Part II
• Journal Articles Instructions
Notes & Pre-Class Activities: 7
Identifying the Argument, Due 9 AM on Quercus
3.4
Pay Disparities
Journal Articles Activity
Discuss Synthesis Matrix
8.1
• Peterson & Morgan (G&S, p412-420, no notes needed)
Paper Project: Part III
• Synthesis Matrix Instructions
Notes & Pre-Class Activities: 8
Bring list of Journal Articles and Abstracts to class today
3.11
Synthesis Matrix Activity
Discuss Outline
Paper Project: Part IV and V
• Outline Instructions
• Final Paper Instructions
Bring Synthesis Matrix to class today
Peer Review of Articles and Abstracts Due on Quercus
3.18
Constructing Race
Outline
Discuss Reverse Outline
10.1
• Omi & Winant (G&S, p222-227)—NO NOTES NEEDED
Bring Outline to class today
Notes & Pre-Class Activities, 10
Peer Review of Synthesis Matrix Due on Quercus
3.25
Racial Discrimination
Reverse Outline
11.1
• Bertrand and Mullainathan (G&S, p254-259)—NO NOTES NEEDED
Bring Paper Draft I and Outline to class today
Notes & Pre-Class Activities, 11
4.1
Clarity
Bring Paper Draft II to class today
Peer Reviews for Reverse Outline and Clarity due via Quercus at 9 AM on Tuesday, 4.2
Final Paper Due on Monday via Quercus 4.8 at Noon.