Computational Science and Engineering Capstone 
Project Course - AC297r 
Course ID:156202 
2017 Spring 
Tuesday 04:00pm - 06:00pm 
Location: Pierce 301 
  
Instructor: Pavlos Protopapas 
 
Canvas site: https://canvas.harvard.edu/courses/20897 
Project Display Site: ​http://iacs.seas.harvard.edu/capstone 
 
Teaching Fellows:  
Reinier Maat, maat@g.harvard.edu 
Isaac Slavitt, isaac.slavitt@gmail.com 
Teresa Ruiz, truiz@seas.harvard.edu 
Patrick Ohiomaba, ohiomoba@gmail.com 
Abdul Wasay, awasay@g.harvard.edu 
Daniele Foresti,  dforesti@seas.harvard.edu 
Matt Holman, mholman@cfa.harvard.edu 
Eleni Kaxiras, ​eleni@seas.harvard.edu 
[Niv Dayan, dayan@g.harvard.edu] 
[Orit Peleg, dayan@g.harvard.edu] 
Syllabus 
The CSE Capstone Project course will give you the opportunity to work as a team to 
integrate knowledge acquired in ​other courses and to apply skills and ideas in 
computational and data science such as data management, machine learning, 
statistics, and visualization. You will have the opportunity to solve complex 
real-world problems working across​  knowledge domains and applying cutting-edge 
tools and methods incorporating critical thinking. 
 
While working on a substantial and challenging project with your partner 
organization, company, or research lab, you will practice ​professional skills​. Upon 
completion of the Capstone Project Course you will be prepared to conduct research 
at a professional level. The projects will be selected so that current statistical, 
machine learning, computational, and engineering methods can be used. In 
addition, most projects have been designed to address important contemporary 
business and societal issues. 
A significant component of the course will be the ​substantial feedback​ and 
guidance from the professor and the teaching fellows (TFs)s, including explicit 
measures of evaluation, feedback on all aspects of the project and its 
implementation, as well as self-assessment and peer evaluation. This feedback 
process will begin with the data acquisition and data exploration phase and extend 
through the design and implementation phase of the project.  
You will also most likely meet with your ​project partner organizations​ a few 
times but these meetings are for consultation and feedback only. Goals and 
guidelines are set during meetings with the professor and the TFs and you will be 
graded by the professor and the TFs Some partners are more hands-on than others 
and you will have the opportunity to determine the level of partner involvement 
jointly during the course. 
 
We expect you to work with your team members to develop your ​collaborative 
skills​ such as group management and conflict resolution, and to sustain good 
interpersonal relations. You will be asked to evaluate each team member’s 
contribution as well as your own contribution to the project. Many employers 
consider the ability to engage in productive teamwork a requirement for success.  
Learning Outcomes for this course 
●
collaborate with others in conducting research or applied science 
●
acquire, organize and process data 
●
create and outline solutions using statistics, machine learning and 
mathematical modeling 
●
implement those solutions 
●
communicate and defend your work 
●
practice professional skills by communicating with partners from outside the 
University in a courteous and punctual manner. 
Online Discussion 
Students are encouraged to talk about their projects, difficulties and all, and to 
engage with students doing other projects. This will make your experience more 
fun, and your knowledge base larger. 
 
Each project group will have a private space in Canvas to share documents and 
private communications. 
 
Notifications and class news will be posted on Canvas and sent via Canvas 
notifications. Please make sure you have Notifications turned on otherwise you 
might miss important announcements. 
Course Structure 
Town Hall Meetings (a.k.a class time) 
The nature of Capstone projects is such that you will be mostly working with your 
group and instructors. There will be a weekly ​Town Hall Meeting​ of the whole 
class on Tuesdays 4:00pm to 6:00pm in Pierce 301 starting ​January 24th 2017 
and ending April 25th. During the meeting: 
 
●
we will have the typical class announcements 
●
we will have short tutorials or guest lectures on both technical and 
non-technical subjects such as communicating in the professional world 
(being on time, being courteous, wearing the right clothes, etc), all about 
Intellectual Property, all about Start-ups. 
 
Attendance is mandatory. 
Weekly meetings with your group’s Teaching Fellow  
Each project group will be assigned a specific TF, with whom they will work for the 
whole semester. The group will meet with the TF on a weekly basis. These meetings 
will be freely structured and will allow for collaborative work while the TF is present 
to answer any questions. Every other week these meetings will coincide with the 
meetings with Prof. Protopapas (see below.) 
Bi-Weekly meetings with the professor (Pavlos)  
Before each meeting you will share a diary/workbook of your work with the 
professor and the TFs so they can familiarize themselves with your progress. This 
communication will make the meetings run more efficiently.  
 
Bi-weekly:​ each group will have update meetings with Pavlos. Regular meetings 
will be 53 min long.  
 
 
 
Midterms 
After the end of each phase, there will be a midterm (see schedule) during which 
you are expected to present the progress of your work. There are two such 
midterms. The first one you will present your work to the class, the second  
Meetings with the partners 
You will write a report to the partner, have the TF approve it and then send it to the 
partner. We have high expectations for your meetings with the partners. You need 
to be courteous, punctual, and well prepared.  
 
Final Presentations and  Showcase 
On May 8th there will be a poster session for all the projects (mark your calendars) 
and on May 10-11 we will have the final presentations.  
 
 
 
Project Phases, Milestones and Midterms 
Phase 1: team formation - project selection - connect with 
partners - project re-definition (weeks 1-4) 
In this phase, the TFs will introduce the projects, you will choose your project, meet 
the project partner, understand the problem, set up your group including the roles, 
refine the project goals, and produce a preliminary project plan. 
Phase 2: Learning and Data exploration or contractual statement 
(weeks 5-8) 
In this phase you will review, understand, and if needed, learn the existing 
state-of-the-art methods in the literature relevant to the project problem. You 
might need to learn statistical and machine learning methodologies, if you are not 
already familiar with them (e.g. deep neural networks, variational methods, etc). 
You will also explore the data (for projects with data), and redefine the project 
definition and goals. 
Phase 3: Formulation of solution, implementation (weeks 9-13) 
In this phase, the heart of the project, you will get to implement and try ideas using 
the methods you learned in the previous phase. You will also address computational 
and performance issues. 
Final Phase : Presentations 
This is a continuation of the previous phase where you narrow down your 
methodology, finish the implementation and produce results. This is the final 
product and result-driven phase.  
Course Policies 
Grades:  
Midterm 1 (including report to partner): 20% 
Midterm 2 (including report to partner): 20% 
Poster session: 10%  
Final Presentation: 30% 
Final Report: 10%  
Peer Assessment: 10%  
 
Assessment 
You will be assessed individually for your contribution to the group’s work. Five (5) 
pts. will be given for your efforts to create a successful team experience. Your 
grade will be determined by the points earned during the phases of this course. 
 
Pavlos’ grade rubric is Top, Middle, Low and Inadequate for the following criteria : 
1. Substantial Effort  
2. Depth of Investigation  
3. Explanation of Method  
4. Choices made and Why  
5. Thoroughness  
6. Presentation 
You will submit reports in Canvas. No work will be accepted after the deadline. Do 
not leave submission for the last minute as we all know that this is when the web 
breaks. 
Peer Assessment 
10% of the grade for each milestone will be self and peer evaluation. Peer 
evaluations are an important skill to learn so we expect you to give thorough and 
constructive feedback. 
●
Self and Intra-group evaluation : you will be evaluating your teammates’ and 
your own contribution during midterm and finals. 
●
Inter-group evaluation :  your group will be asked to evaluate another group. 
At least one member of your group is expected to be present at the 
presentation of the other team and to write the evaluation.  
Collaboration Policy 
You are expected to motivate and help each other in your group. You will ask you to 
sign a “contract” with your teammates.  
Questionnaires 
We might ask you to complete a couple of online questionnaires during the 
semester. The answers will be used to assess the progress of the course so far and 
will not affect your grade. 
Missed classes and Assignment Deadlines 
It is very important that you attend all presentations. You are allowed only one 
absence from a presentation for whatever reason provided that the rest of your 
group is there. If more than one member is absent​ ​the presentation must be 
rescheduled for the week after. You are allowed only one such extension.  
Originality and Plagiarism 
You must do your own work; we have zero tolerance for plagiarization.  
You must acknowledge any source code that was not written by you by mentioning 
the original author(s) directly in your source code (comment or header). You can 
also acknowledge sources in a README.txt file if you used whole classes or 
libraries. Do not remove any original copyright notices and headers. However, you 
are encouraged to use libraries, unless explicitly stated otherwise! 
You may use examples you find on the web as a starting point, provided their 
licenses allow you to reuse the example. You must quote the source using proper 
citations (author, year, title, time accessed, URL) both in the source code and in 
any publicly visible material.  
If you have any doubts about whether a library is available to use in your work, 
please direct your question to one of the TFs. 
Accommodations with students with disabilities  
Students needing academic adjustments or accommodations because of a 
documented disability must present their Faculty Letter from the Accessible 
Education Office (AEO) and speak with me by the end of the second week of the 
term to identify, discuss, and document any feasible instructional modifications or 
accommodations. Students from the extension school should contact the extension 
school disability office at ​disabilities@dcemail.harvard.edu​ or (617) 
495-0977.Failure to do so may result in inability to respond in a timely manner. All 
discussions will remain confidential, although I may contact AEO to discuss 
appropriate implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
