ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
Praxis II Syllabus!
Praxis II builds on the skills and attitudes developed in Praxis I by having students complete a single, more
in-depth design cycle that spans problem finding and framing through to concept development and
realization (through prototyping and other means). As such the course provides a forum for students to
continue to develop their skills, attitudes and aptitudes as engineering designers. Praxis II follows from
Praxis I and reinforces the key tenets of the Praxis Approach to Engineering Design:
• Focusing on the quality and credibility of engineering designs;
• Using research to make and defend design decisions;
• Developing individualized conceptions of “engineering design” that guide action and exploration; and,
• Integrating theory and practice.
1. Course Overview!
In Praxis II, students are exposed to more advanced engineering design and communication concepts and
apply this knowledge to more complex situations. Praxis II asks students to take on leadership,
entrepreneurial, and consulting roles within the context of engineering design by first identifying a suitable
design challenge and then designing a solution to that challenge.
Students in Praxis II are presented with following design challenge which guides the entire course:
!
The Praxis II schedule is divided into two phases: framing and solving.
1.1. Framing Phase!
In the framing phase, students seek out and develop an understanding of a particular community in the
greater Toronto area. This involves identifying the community, understanding its nature, consulting with its
members or representatives, and identifying problems that negatively impact that community’s quality of
life. This understanding must incorporate both technical and nontechnical (e.g. social, political, ethical, etc.)
perspectives.
This phase culminates in each team authoring a Request for Proposal (RFP) that codifies the need for
improvement that has been identified and frames the situation such that a successful engineering design
solution is possible. A subset of the RFPs developed in the framing phase is selected to proceed to the
solution phase.
1.2. Solving Phase!
During the solving phase, students develop candidate engineering designs that meet the requirements
outlined in the RFPs. As they develop their solutions, students will explore the uses, advantages and
limitations of formal engineering design tools and processes. The focus of the solution phase is on developing
quality, credible, engineering design concepts.
Praxis II culminates in an open Showcase during which proposed student designs, supported by
prototype(s), will be reviewed and evaluated on both their technical and nontechnical merits. Students will
concurrently be evaluated on their communication abilities through the media of written abstracts, posters,
and oral presentations.
Effect a real and measurable improvement in the lived
experience of a community located in the Greater Toronto Area.
[1! /!8]
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
2. Teaching Team!
The Teaching Team in Praxis II integrates Engineering Communication instructors and Engineering Design
instructors, as both are significant stakeholders in the Praxis II learning experience.
Office hours with the Teaching Team are by appointment on a first-contact, first-scheduled basis.
3. Assignments and Distribution of Grades!
Course Instructors
Jason Foster
jason.foster@utoronto.ca
Rob Irish
r.irish@utoronto.ca
Studio Teaching Team
Jenny Lofgreen
j.lofgreen@utoronto.ca
Neil Shyminsky
n.shyminsky@utoronto.ca
Ted Nolan
emartin.nolan@utoronto.ca
James Bateman (1T3 ΝΨ Physics)
james.bateman@mail.utoronto.ca
Andrew Flood (0T8 ΝΨ Physics)
andrew.flood@mail.utoronto.ca
Ante Lausic (1T0 ΝΨ Nanoengineering)
ante.lausic@utoronto.ca
Giorgio Proestos (1T2 ΝΨ Infrastructure)
giorgio.proestos@mail.utoronto.ca
Patricia Sheridan (0T9 Mechanical)
patricia.sheridan@utoronto.ca
Due Date Deliverable Weight Submitter
Studio week of 2014-01-13 Community Pitch 5% Individual
2014-01-17 @ 2400 ESEC Feedback 1% Individual
2014-02-17 @1800 Request for Proposal (RFP) 20% Team
2014-03-02 @ 2400 RFP Revision 10% Team
Studio week of 2014-03-24 Design Critique 10% Team
TBD
(Likely 2014-04-11or 2014-04-14)
Design Showcase
•Prototype(s) •Poster •Presentation •One-Pager
25% Team
At various points during the
term corresponding to key
Team experiences
Praxis II Course Surveys 4% Individual
7 days after the
Design Showcase at 2400
Design Handbook 15% Individual
7 days after the
Design Showcase at 2400
Design Portfolio 10% Individual
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [2! /!8]
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
3.1. Design Handbook!
The Praxis II Design Handbook is a process- and tools-focused complement to the Praxis I and Praxis II
Design Portfolios. While the Portfolios focus on deliverables and public presentation, the Design Handbook
focuses on the design tools and processes that informed those deliverables. Unlike the public audience of the
Portfolio, the primary audience for the Design Handbook is the designer (as they engage in future design
activities).
The Design Handbook is an informal document kept by an individual designer to improve their future
performance as an engineering designer. The Design Handbook captures the designer’s preferred design
tools and processes in a format that the designer can use in future design activities (e.g. in AER201) as a
personalized reference work. The Handbook captures both design theory, sourced primarily but not
exclusively from engineering design literature (but also lectures, interviews, workshops, etc.), and design
practice, in the form of worked examples from the designer’s own experience (for example from ESC101 and
ESC102).
Practically, students should have already developed a basis for the Design Handbook as part of the Praxis I
Design Portfolio. Segments such as the design process and worked examples of process can be extracted from
the Praxis I Design Portfolio to form the foundation of the Praxis II Design Handbook.
A Design Handbook differs from a Design Notebook , which is also used in professional 1 practice. A Design
Notebook is a realtime capture of the design activities undertaken during a single project to document what
was done, when, and by whom, during that single project. A Handbook, on the other hand, draws from
multiple design activities, and includes a subset of the design activities undertaken during each project. Its
primary purpose is to collect the key design activities and tools across multiple projects to assist the
designer in future projects as reference material (or design practice). As such a Design Handbook is usually
structured around the different phases of an engineering design process.
3.2. Design Portfolio!
The Praxis II Design Portfolio extends and builds on the Design Portfolio developed in Praxis I. Students
received feedback on their Praxis I Portfolios, which offers a starting point for improvement. The Praxis II
Design Portfolio should continue to demonstrate strengths, areas of progress, and areas for future
development as an engineering designer. However, it should provide more depth and incorporate more
experience than the Praxis I Portfolio.
3.3. ESEC Feedback!
ESEC is a mandatory event taking place on Friday, January 17, 2014. To earn a “participation mark” for
ESEC, each student must complete a brief survey that focuses on the talks they attended.
3.4. Community Pitch!
The community pitch is a two-to-three minute presentation in which each student proposes a community of
interest located within the Greater Toronto Area. This community must have the potential to develop into a
“client” or “key stakeholder” for a design project. The critical points of the pitch are identifying a meaningful
community, understanding its dynamics and key points for accessing that community, and demonstrating
that a first-year EngSci team can effect a real and measurable improvement in their lived experience.
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [3! /!8]
!1 Engineering Design Notebooks are considered to be legal documents, and can be used as evidence in contractual disputes, inquests,
and intellectual property protection. Students in Praxis II should keep a Design Notebook as a record of their activities; students in
Praxis II must develop a Design Handbook.
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
3.5. Request for Proposal (RFP) and RFP Revision!
The Request for Proposal (RFP) builds on the Praxis I Product Design Brief assignment and challenges
students to frame an engineering challenge to the levels expected by industry and government. Success in
the RFP assignment requires that teams identify and frame an engineering design challenge, identify and
directly engage with stakeholders, consult with relevant codes and standards, and develop comprehensive
engineering requirements. The target audience for an RFP is the engineers who will submit proposed design
concepts that meet the requirements and address the stakeholder needs codified within the RFP.
Because of not only the challenges of writing a quality RFP but also the importance of the RFP to the
second phase of Praxis II, all teams will be required to revise their RFP based on feedback from the Teaching
Team. As part of the revision, each team will include a summary of their changes to enable efficient and
effective assessment of the revised RFPs.
3.6. Design Critique!
The Design Critique provides an opportunity for teams to receive feedback before the final Design Showcase.
Teams will present their design concepts formally to their Studio Teaching Team and informally to their
peers. The Studio Teaching Team will critique the concepts, presentation, and discussion to help teams
refine their design concepts and design thinking.
3.7. Design Showcase!
The Design Showcase is a public event during which student designs, supported by prototype(s), will be
reviewed and evaluated on both their technical and nontechnical merits. Students will concurrently be
evaluated on their communication abilities through the media of written summary, posters, and oral
presentations. For the Design Showcase, each team must produce four deliverables:
1. A full-colour, large-format, single-sheet poster; the costs of poster production are borne by the team
2. One or more prototypes of their design(s)
3. A flexible presentation that can be tailored to the needs of a variety of audiences ranging from curious
public guests to assessing members of the Teaching Team
4. A one-page project summary or “pitch” suitable for a general audience. This summary is analogous to
the written portion of the Praxis I Kickstarter Package.
3.8. Course Surveys!
At various points during the term students will be asked to complete surveys that will inform them, their
teammates, the Teaching Team and other course stakeholders of their performance. These surveys will be
timed to coincide with key Team experiences and may be used as evidence regarding the fairness of intrateam
workload allocation.
4. Resources!
4.1. Recommended Text!
Irish, R. and Weiss, P., Engineering Communication From Principles to Practice, Oxford University Press,
2nd Edition. 2013.
This textbook (also used in Praxis I) explains the principles for effective engineering communication in detail
and is useful reference for both future academic and professional engineering communication activities.
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [4! /!8]
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
4.2. Design Critique and Showcase!
As there are no textbook costs associated with Praxis II, students should expect to spend approximately the
same amount in this course as they would for textbooks in their other courses on their poster and
prototype(s) and may engage in additional exploration, experimentation, or construction; the costs of these
activities are to be borne by the students. Grade and level of expenditure will not be causally linked.
4.3. Electronic Resources!
5. Activities and Workload!
5.1. Lectures (3 scheduled hours per week)!
Lectures introduce both the concepts required to successfully complete the course and examples of how those
concepts can be and have been applied. Students are encouraged to ask questions in lecture to help clarify
their understanding and that of the class.
5.2. Studios (“Tutorial”; 2 scheduled hours per week)!
Studios are designed as weekly focused activities and opportunities for group work and consultation with the
teaching team. The activities of the studio are cumulative, that is one builds on the next and students will
work both individually and in teams to meet course objectives. Studios have unique deliverables that often
inform or are prerequisites for further activities in Praxis II; active participation in Studio is essential to
student success.
5.3. Workload!
The nominal expectation is that students spend a minimum of one hour outside of class for every one hour of
classroom time. On a weekly basis this translates to a minimum of five hours per student per week.
6. Graduate Attributes and Learning Objectives!
Having completed Praxis II, all students are expected to have continued on the path to possessing the
abilities and understandings linked to the following CEAB graduate attributes:
"
Blackboard: available through https://portal.utoronto.ca
Downloads: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/courses/esc102/20141/
Wiki: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/wikis/1t7
Twitter Feed: follow username EngSciPraxis and hashtag #esc102
Surveys: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/surveys
Tickets: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/tickets
Realtime Communication: ircs://design.engsci.utoronto.ca:6667
Team-effectiveness
Learning System:
https://teamlearning.ilead.utoronto.ca/team-app
3.1.3 Investigation
3.1.4 Design
3.1.5 Engineering tools
3.1.6 Teamwork
3.1.7 Communication skills
3.1.8 Professionalism
3.1.9 Impact of engineering on society and the environment
3.1.10 Ethics and equity
3.1.11 Economics and project management
3.1.12 Lifelong Learning
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [5! /!8]
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
Having completed Praxis II, all students are expected to be able to:
1. Engage in quality, credible engineering design praxis
a. Describe personal, credible, and professionally acceptable definitions of “engineering design”,
“engineering credibility”, and “engineering quality”;
b. Enact their engineering definitions
(for example through defining a process or processes, identifying specific tools that suit their
definition and personal abilities, through developing suitable metrics, etc.); and,
c. Frame a challenge in engineering terms such that it can be addressed using engineering design
methods; and,
d. Develop credible concept designs in response to a Request for Proposal, using the tools of engineering
design.
2. Incorporate rigorous engineering design principles, tools, and techniques into their design practice
a. Locate, analyze, and synthesize credible engineering design resources including experts, research
papers, textbooks, handbooks, manuals, etc.;
b. Demonstrate that their design activities were informed by such resources; and,
c. Apply the same rigorous practice to the communication of their engineering design.
3. Express engineering designs and ideas
a. Select appropriate modes of communication, working within established design related genres such
as the RFP, poster, and abstract;
b. Structure the information being expressed;
c. Adapt established expressive processes; and
d. Apply established models of expression in both textual and visual domains.
4. Make engineering arguments
a. Analyze the audience of an argument and tailor the argument accordingly;
b. Frame an argument in a manner accepted by the engineering community;
c. Ground an argument in an established theory of argumentation; and
d. Apply rhetorical principles to the design of text and visuals.
7. Assessment!
The Praxis Assessment Process allows – and encourages – students to discuss the feedback they receive on
their assignments and activities openly with the Teaching Team as part of an ongoing learning cycle. If
questions or concerns exist about assessment, students should provide evidence that they have read and
understood assessor’s comments, and can provide credible justification for reassessment. If differences in
opinion regarding assessment continue after such discussion, students may request that their work be
assessed by a Course Instructor. If that occurs, the new assessment will supersede the original
regardless of whether the resulting grade is higher, lower, or the same.
7.1. Grading Expectations!
Obtaining an “A” grade in Praxis requires not only that students demonstrate strong evidence of original
thinking that goes beyond what is required, but also that they communicate clearly using all appropriate
media.
7.2. Team Grades!
Teams are expected to divide work fairly. Determining “fairness” is up to the team, but may involve equal
time or equal value of work. Students should report any team difficulties to a member of the Teaching Team
as early as possible. By default, members of a team receive an identical grade on team assignments.
However, based on interactions with the Teaching Team and Team Survey feedback, the Course Instructors
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [6! /!8]
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
may adjust the grades within a team. Students may be asked for documentation of team interactions as
evidence of team function.
7.3. Late Penalties!
Assignments that are submitted late will be subject to a cumulative penalty of no less than 5% per calendar
day or part thereof . Note that this practice deviates from the more common industry practice of not
accepting late deliverables.
7.4. Support and Accommodation!
Students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. Students who have a disability
or health consideration that may require accommodations are both encouraged and welcome to approach the
a member of the Teaching Team as soon as possible. Should accommodations be necessary, by
University of Toronto policy students are required to contact the Accessibility Services Office.
The Accessibility Services staff are available by appointment to assess specific needs, provide referrals, and
arrange appropriate accommodations.
8. Policies!
Engineering Science Students are expected to comport themselves professionally and to exercise common
sense. They are also expected to be familiar with, and act according to, University policies, guidelines, and
interpretations. Of particular importance are those mentioned in the “Academic Regulation” section of the
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering Academic Calendar.
8.1. Plagiarism!
The University of Toronto treats plagiarism as a violation of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
Plagiarism is a serious forms of cheating in which a student makes use of someone else’s ideas or words
without giving appropriate attribution. In academic work, plagiarism usually occurs in one of three ways:
1. You cut and paste a piece of someone else’s text, code, or figure but do not clearly show the source both
in a citation and in a list of references.
2. You hand in work done by others (e.g. teammates) without putting their names on the work
3. You rephrase someone else’s idea into your own words, but do not give credit to the source of the idea.
The University takes cheating very seriously. Penalties can include zero on the assignment, zero in the
course, annotations on your transcript (which would be seen by a potential graduate school or employer), or
in extreme cases expulsion from the University. If you are concerned about your use of sources, discuss your
concerns with your Studio Instructor or a Course Instructor before submitting a document for assessment.
8.2. Instructional Materials and Copyright!
Students are prohibited from recording or otherwise reproducing any copyrighted materials associated with
this course unless they obtain prior permission from the copyright holder. All lectures are copyright of the
lecturers.
8.3. Intellectual Property!
Design work undertaken in this course falls under the auspices of the “University of Toronto Inventions
Policy”, available online at:
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/invent.htm
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [7! /!8]
ESC102 – ENGINEERING SCIENCE PRAXIS II – 20141
This policy stipulates that “… the University shall solely own all rights” to such works. Students who believe
that their design work should be protected must inform the Teaching Team prior to the submission of that
work.
Students agree that by taking this course all submitted deliverables may be used for teaching and learning
purposes, in this or subsequent courses, or to support research into improving engineering education. Should
such use take place the deliverables will be modified to be FIPPA-compliant. Students who are concerned
about the intellectual property ramifications of potential disclosure must notify the Course Instructors prior
to the end of the academic session.
The intellectual property of all students submitting to Turnitin.com is protected by the licensing agreement
between the University of Toronto and iParadigms. This agreement further ensures that student papers
submitted to Turnitin.com will not be used for commercial purposes.
8.4. English Proficiency Requirement!
In Engineering Science, successful completion of the written components of Praxis I demonstrated such
proficiency.
8.5. Turnitin!
Students agree that by taking this course all required papers may be subject to submission for textual
similarity review to Turnitin.com for the detection of plagiarism. All submitted papers will be included as
source documents in the Turnitin.com reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of
such papers. The terms that apply to the University's use of the Turnitin.com service are described on the
Turnitin.com web site. The intellectual property of all students submitting to Turnitin.com is protected by
the licensing agreement between the University of Toronto and iParadigms. This agreement further ensures
that student papers submitted to Turnitin.com will not be used for commercial purposes.
8.6. Illness!
While the Teaching Team will work with students to ensure that they are not disadvantaged should they
become ill, students have a responsibility to work in good faith with the Teaching Team to make
appropriate accommodations. Students who become ill and are unable to complete their Praxis and
Design assignment(s), or whose performance is compromised, have the option of petitioning their
circumstances by following the information available in the Academic Calendar or online at:
http://www.undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/Office_of_the_Registrar/Petitions.htm
Note that should you choose to pursue this path, you will need to acquire appropriate medical documentation
at the time of your illness; documentation acquired after the fact will not be accepted.
Because much of the student work in Praxis takes place within teams, students should be careful to make
arrangements with their teammates in order to mitigate the effects of a potential absence. The Teaching
Team will work with student teams to help them make these arrangements.
SYLLABUS REV. 0.9 [8! /!8]