ME / IE 497 SAE Section Syllabus
Fall 2013
Instructors
Dr. Robert Paasch
Teaching Assistants
Trevor Takaro (Rogers 128 trevor.
takaro@globalformularacing.
com)
Sam Kopp (Rogers 128 sam.
kopp@globalformularacing.
com)
Phil Arscott (Rogers 128 phillip.
arscott@globalformularacing.
com)
Paul Weitzman (Rogers 110 paul.
weitzman@globalformularacing.
com)
Derek Duncan (Rogers 128 derek.duncan@globalformularacing.
com)
SAE Graduate Students
Robert Culbertson (Rogers 110 robert.
culbertson@globalformularacing.
com)
Robert Story (Rogers 110 robert.
story@globalformularacing.
com)
Credits: Fall: 4
Winter: 4
Day/Time: Fall: TR 4:00–5:50 pm
Winter: MW 4:00–5:50 pm
COURSE OVERVIEW
IE/ME 497 & IE/ME 498 (MIME Capstone Design), the School of Mechanical, Industrial and
Manufacturing Engineering’s capstone design sequence, gives MIME seniors the
opportunity to integrate the engineering knowledge and experience they’ve gained
throughout their undergraduate program and apply their skills to work on realworld
engineering projects. To complete these projects, teams of students (1) work with
sponsors, perform analyses, and conduct research to develop requirements for a
mechanical or industrial system or solution to a mechanical or industrial engineering
problem; (2) design the system or solution methods; (3) implement a prototype, model, or
method according to the system or solution design; (4) operate the prototype, model, or
method; (5) evaluate the prototype, model, or method with respect to the project
requirements; (6) document the process, products, and results; and (7) manage the
projects.
Each student team works on a distinct project. In addition to being supervised and
evaluated by one of the course instructors, each team works with a representative of the
project’s sponsor or customer (“sponsor mentor”) and a MIME advisor who provides
technical guidance and consulting. In addition to their technical roles, the sponsor mentor
and MIME advisor evaluate student performance and provide input to the course instructors
for grading purposes. For some projects, the sponsor mentor and MIME advisor may be the
same person. In rare cases, one of the course instructors may fill all three roles.
MIME Capstone Design is also the School of MIME’s designated writingintensive
course
sequence that satisfies the university’s WIC requirement. Course participants complete a
variety of written and oral assignments that support the engineering design process, further
their engineering communication skills, and otherwise prepare them for success in their
chosen profession. In completing these assignments, students are expected to review and
respond to one another’s writing in a professional and collegial manner; revise individually
and collaboratively produced drafts; and use informal writing techniques to explore and
solve engineering analysis, design, and evaluation problems.
COURSESPECIFIC
LEARNING OUTCOMES
At the completion of MIME Capstone Design, students will be able to perform the following
tasks:
1. Starting from a sponsor’s statements of need, work with the sponsor, perform
appropriate research and analyses, and apply relevant engineering standards to
develop formal requirements for a mechanical system, an industrial system, or the
solution to a mechanical or industrial problem.
2. Considering multiple alternative approaches, design and implement a prototype,
model, or method to meet those requirements by correctly applying appropriate
engineering principles.
3. Operate or implement the prototype, model, or method and evaluate the results
against the requirements using objective performance measures.
4. Plan and manage the project so as to use team resources efficiently and meet
project requirements on time and on or under budget.
5. Recognize and constructively address ethical dilemmas that may arise and potential
adverse environmental, safety, health, and social impacts.
6. Collaboratively produce written and oral reports that effectively communicate project
information to target audiences—i.e., that are at the appropriate technical level for
these audiences and follow disciplinary conventions of usage, vocabulary, format,
and citation.
7. Function effectively on a team, contributing to all major aspects of the design,
implementation, and testing of an engineering project.
ABET PROGRAM OUTCOMES
In developing your skills in product design and development, MIME Capstone Design
directly supports ABET Program Outcome c, “Ability to design a system, component, or
process to meet desired needs within realistic constraints such as economic,
environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and
sustainability.”
In focusing on the communication and teamwork skills needed for producing formal
engineering reports and preparing and delivering professionalquality
oral presentations,
thinking critically about local and global design issues, and working collaboratively on
engineering projects, this course sequence also supports ABET Program Outcome d,
“Ability to focus on multidisciplinary teams,” and g, “Ability to communicate effectively.”
Finally, the content of this capstone design course sequence also supports ABET Program
Outcome f, “Understanding of professional and ethical responsibility” and i “Recognition of
the need for, and ability to engage in, lifelong learning.”
WIC PROGRAM OUTCOMES
Students will
1. Develop and articulate content knowledge and critical thinking in the discipline
through frequent practice of informal and formal writing.
2. Demonstrate knowledge/understanding of audience expectations, genres, and
conventions appropriate to communicating in the discipline.
3. Demonstrate the ability to compose a document of at least 2000 words through
multiple aspects of writing, including brainstorming, drafting, using sources
appropriately, and revising comprehensively after receiving feedback on a draft.
POLICY REGARDING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Accommodations are collaborative efforts between students, faculty and Disability Access
Services (DAS). Students with accommodations approved through DAS are responsible
for contacting the faculty member in charge of the course prior to or during the first week of
the term to discuss accommodations. Students who believe they are eligible for
accommodations but who have not yet obtained approval through DAS should contact DAS
immediately at 5417374098.
POLICY REGARDING STUDENT ACADEMIC DISHONESTY AND CONDUCT
Instances of student academic dishonesty and improper conduct will be dealt with
according to University policy. Students are referred to
http://oregonstate.edu/admin/stucon/achon.htm for a definition and examples of academic
dishonesty and improper conduct.
MACHINING LAB CERTIFICATION
For students completing senior projects with significant mechanical design requirements,
certification to work in the MIME machining lab is strongly encouraged. If you are not
certified, contact Brian Jensen immediately to schedule your certification. Lack of
machining lab certification is not a valid excuse for your project being over budget or behind
schedule or otherwise failing to meet course requirements.
Key Deadlines
Topic Points Date
Team Charter & Presentation 50 Tues. 10Oct13
Background Report 200 Thurs. 24Oct13
Preliminary Proposal 200 Thurs. 14Nov13
Final Proposal 250 Thurs. 9Dec13
Project Notebook 50 Thurs. 12Dec13
Course Notes
1. Google will be used as the primary communication and information tool (Gmail, Google
Drive, Sites, Calendar, etc.)
2. Team charter must be completed in google sites.
3. Team presentations must be completed in google presentation and embedded in google
sites.
4. Reports must be completed in google docs.
5. Assignments are expected to be properly completed and formatted by 23:59 PST on the
due date.
6. Proper formatting and general writing requirements can be found in the GFR14 Senior
Project and Baja 2014 Senior Project folders on the Mohr Drive, as well as in the GFR14
senior project folder on google drive
7. Assignment descriptions & grading rubrics for all reports are located as stated above. You
are responsible for ensuring your assignments fulfill requirements.
8. The class will be divided into two groups
a. Group A: Baja and Formula management projects
b. Group B: All other Formula Projects
c. Both groups attend Group A presentation days, only Group B attends Group B
presentation days
ME/IE 497 Assignment Summary
(See full Assignment Description in Senior Project folders)
Group Charter and Presentation (50 points)
● The Group Charter is a contract between you and your team members stating the
expectations of each other and of the project, to be updated as the term progresses.
● Presentation should be approximately 5 min/team andin
4 slidespresent:
○ Team Goals
○ Group Member Roles and Responsibilities
○ Potential Barriers and Coping Strategies
○ Standards for Availability
Project Notebook (50 points)
● Your senior project notebook is a log of all your engineering work which is not on google
● You must carry your notebook with you at all times and record the results/decisions of all
meetings
● Organization of the notebook is up to you
● Anything you are writing down as part of your project should be in this notebook
● Notebooks will be checked at the end of the term
Background Report (200 points)
● Follow the Example Report template through section 2.1 Current
State Analysis.
● Additional requirements in the GFR14 OSU Project Group Report Instructions and
Requirements.
● Graded using the Fall 2013 ME/IE 497 SAE Grading Rubrics.
Preliminary Proposal (200 points)
● Follow the Example Report template through section 3 Design
Analysis, with previous
sections updated per critique.
● Additional requirements in the GFR14 OSU Project Group Report Instructions and
Requirements.
● Graded using the Fall 2013 ME/IE 497 SAE Grading Rubrics.
Final Proposal (250 points)
● Follow the Example Report template through section 4 Design
Selected, with previous
sections updated per critique.
● Additional requirements in the GFR14 OSU Project Group Report Instructions and
Requirements.
● Graded using the Fall 2013 ME/IE 497 SAE Grading Rubrics.
Weekly Presentations (100 points)
● Google Presentation should be short (58
min/group incl. questions) and must be done in
Google Presentations, embedded in Google Sites They will include:
○ Progress made since last presentation
○ Planned progress till next presentation
○ Issues that need to be resolved on a higher level then your project group
○ Up to date schedule
Project Contribution Subjective
(150 points)
● Completion of objectives and effort put for to complete your project, as well as your
contribution to the overall subteam goals
● Attendance to all the ME 306 classes and work sessions
● Completion of project management requirements (Part Evaluation Sheet, Gantt Chart,
etc.) (Formula members)
2013 Fall Term Schedule
Activity / Task Week Date
Full Senior Project Group for SAE Team Members 1 1Oct13
1st SAE Class Introduction,
Project Description/Choice 1 3Oct13
Group Assignments, Introduction to Google, Group Charter creation 2 8Oct13
Team Charter Presentations in Class, GROUP CHARTER DUE 2 10Oct13
Individual Project Group Meetings A 3 15Oct13
Individual Project Group Meetings B Reading quiz! 3 17Oct13
Full Class: Status Presentations A 4 22Oct13
Full Class: Status Presentations B; BACKGROUND REPORTS DUE 4 24Oct13
Individual Project Group Meetings A 5 29Oct13
Individual Project Group Meetings B 5 31Oct13
Full Class: Status Presentations A; Background Reports Returned 6 5Nov13
Full Class: Status Presentations A Background
Report Critique 6 7Nov13
Individual Project Group Meetings A 7 12Nov13
Individual Project Group Meetings B 7 14Nov13
PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL DUE 8 18Nov13
Full Class: Status Presentations A 8 19Nov13
Full Class: Status Presentations B 8 21Nov13
Individual Project Group Meetings (likely occur over ME348 hours also) 9 26Nov13
Thanksgiving! 9 28Nov13
Full Class: Status Presentations 10 3Dec13
Full Class: Status Presentations 10 5Dec13
FINAL PROPOSAL DUE Finals 9Dec13
Project notebook due Finals 12Dec13
Winter work week: Optional if your project is complete. 1st week break 1620Dec13
ME / IE 498 SAE Section Syllabus
Winter 2013
Instructors
Dr. Robert Paasch (robert.paasch@globalformularacing.
com)
Teaching Assistant
Trevor Takaro (Rogers 128 trevor.
takaro@globalformularacing.
com)
Robert Story (Rogers 110 robert.
story@globalformularacing.
com)
Sam Kopp (Rogers 128 sam.
kopp@globalformularacing.
com)
Derek Duncan (Rogers 128 derek.
duncan@globalformularacing.
com)
Credits: Fall: 4
Winter: 4
Day/Time: Fall: TR 4:00–5:50 pm
Winter: MW 4:00–5:50 pm
COURSE OVERVIEW
IE/ME 497 & IE/ME 498 (MIME Capstone Design), the School of Mechanical, Industrial and
Manufacturing Engineering’s capstone design sequence, gives MIME seniors the opportunity to
integrate the engineering knowledge and experience they’ve gained throughout their
undergraduate program and apply their skills to work on realworld
engineering projects. To
complete these projects, teams of students (1) work with sponsors, perform analyses, and
conduct research to develop requirements for a mechanical or industrial system or solution to a
mechanical or industrial engineering problem; (2) design the system or solution methods; (3)
implement a prototype, model, or method according to the system or solution design; (4) operate
the prototype, model, or method; (5) evaluate the prototype, model, or method with respect to the
project requirements; (6) document the process, products, and results; and (7) manage the
projects.
Each student team works on a distinct project. In addition to being supervised and evaluated by
one of the course instructors, each team works with a representative of the project’s sponsor or
customer (“sponsor mentor”) and a MIME advisor who provides technical guidance and
consulting. In addition to their technical roles, the sponsor mentor and MIME advisor evaluate
student performance and provide input to the course instructors for grading purposes. For some
projects, the sponsor mentor and MIME advisor may be the same person. In rare cases, one of
the course instructors may fill all three roles.
MIME Capstone Design is also the School of MIME’s designated writingintensive
course
sequence that satisfies the university’s WIC requirement. Course participants complete a variety
of written and oral assignments that support the engineering design process, further their
engineering communication skills, and otherwise prepare them for success in their chosen
profession. In completing these assignments, students are expected to review and respond to
one another’s writing in a professional and collegial manner; revise individually and collaboratively
produced drafts; and use informal writing techniques to explore and solve engineering analysis,
design, and evaluation problems.
COURSESPECIFIC
LEARNING OUTCOMES
At the completion of MIME Capstone Design, students will be able to perform the following tasks:
1. Starting from a sponsor’s statements of need, work with the sponsor, perform appropriate
research and analyses, and apply relevant engineering standards to develop formal
requirements for a mechanical system, an industrial system, or the solution to a mechanical
or industrial problem.
2. Considering multiple alternative approaches, design and implement a prototype, model, or
method to meet those requirements by correctly applying appropriate engineering
principles.
3. Operate or implement the prototype, model, or method and evaluate the results against the
requirements using objective performance measures.
4. Plan and manage the project so as to use team resources efficiently and meet project
requirements on time and on or under budget.
5. Recognize and constructively address ethical dilemmas that may arise and potential
adverse environmental, safety, health, and social impacts.
6. Collaboratively produce written and oral reports that effectively communicate project
information to target audiences—i.e., that are at the appropriate technical level for these
audiences and follow disciplinary conventions of usage, vocabulary, format, and citation.
7. Function effectively on a team, contributing to all major aspects of the design,
implementation, and testing of an engineering project.
ABET PROGRAM OUTCOMES
In developing your skills in product design and development, MIME Capstone Design directly
supports ABET Program Outcome c, “Ability to design a system, component, or process to meet
desired needs within realistic constraints such as economic, environmental, social, political,
ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and sustainability.”
In focusing on the communication and teamwork skills needed for producing formal engineering
reports and preparing and delivering professionalquality
oral presentations, thinking critically
about local and global design issues, and working collaboratively on engineering projects, this
course sequence also supports ABET Program Outcome d, “Ability to focus on multidisciplinary
teams,” and g, “Ability to communicate effectively.”
Finally, the content of this capstone design course sequence also supports ABET Program
Outcome f, “Understanding of professional and ethical responsibility” and i “Recognition of the
need for, and ability to engage in, lifelong learning.”
WIC PROGRAM OUTCOMES
Students will
1. Develop and articulate content knowledge and critical thinking in the discipline through
frequent practice of informal and formal writing.
2. Demonstrate knowledge/understanding of audience expectations, genres, and
conventions appropriate to communicating in the discipline.
3. Demonstrate the ability to compose a document of at least 2000 words through multiple
aspects of writing, including brainstorming, drafting, using sources appropriately, and
revising comprehensively after receiving feedback on a draft.
POLICY REGARDING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Accommodations are collaborative efforts between students, faculty and Disability Access
Services (DAS). Students with accommodations approved through DAS are responsible for
contacting the faculty member in charge of the course prior to or during the first week of the term
to discuss accommodations. Students who believe they are eligible for accommodations but who
have not yet obtained approval through DAS should contact DAS immediately at 5417374098.
POLICY REGARDING STUDENT ACADEMIC DISHONESTY AND CONDUCT
Instances of student academic dishonesty and improper conduct will be dealt with according to
University policy. Students are referred to http://oregonstate.edu/admin/stucon/achon.htm for a
definition and examples of academic dishonesty and improper conduct.
MACHINING LAB CERTIFICATION
For students completing senior projects with significant mechanical design requirements,
certification to work in the MIME machining lab is strongly encouraged. If you are not certified,
contact Brian Jensen immediately to schedule your certification. Lack of machining lab
certification is not a valid excuse for your project being over budget or behind schedule or
otherwise failing to meet course requirements.
Key Deadlines
Topic Points Date
Final Report 375 Wed. 13Mar13
General Writing Requirements
● The target audience for all your reports is incoming seniors of the following years.
● All writing is required to be completed in Google Sites.
● All reports are expected to be properly formatted and complete by the end of the day of the day
on the date of submission. (23:59 PST)
● Use Bold text to put emphasis on key statements and points. This should show what you
perceive to be the most important points within text. See the Formula design report for a good
example.
● Citations should be included as hyperlinks
in text whenever possible. These citations
should link to papers uploaded into the Published Documentation folder in Google docs, to other
Team reports that have been uploaded to the Google docs folder structure, or to credible
websites. If referencing a paper or book that you do not have a digital copy of to link to, include a
intext
citation, with a link to where the paper or book can be purchased if possible. (Race Car
Vehicle Dynamics, 1995, pg 3015).
● Links to Data that you are discussing should also be included whenever possible.
● No Attachments nor References sections should be included at the end because all attached
documents should be linked in text throughout the report.
● Google keeps a revision history for every page that includes a new revision every time you edit a
page. In order for this to be useful a manual record of all the major editing changes to the
content of the page must be kept. All report versions as submitted on the date are required
must be documented in the form below at a minimum.
● Grading Rubrics for all Reports can be found HERE!
ME/IE 498 Assignments
1000 total course points
Final Report (375 points)
● Follow the Example Report template through Section 7 Conclusion.
● Make all corrections and/or modifications suggested in the critique of the Final Proposal.
Weekly Presentations (100 points)
● All Presentations should be done in Google Presentations and embedded in Google
Sites according to the *Project Group Template (Formula) / *Project Group Template (Baja).
● For every Project Group according to the Google sites structure there should be 1 presentation
● Google Presentation should be short (58
min/group incl. questions).
Key Slides:
○ Progress made since last presentation
○ Planned progress till next presentation
○ Issues that need to be resolved on a higher level then your project group
○ Smartsheet Gantt chart (navigate to current sheet in Google Sites)
● Use concrete and measurable language as much as possible. (e.g. Part design xxxx complete)
Avoid accomplishments and task plans that are trivial or ambiguous amounts of time. (e.g.
Called xxxxx machining, or worked on xxxxxx)
● If you have pictures of modeling, finished parts, problems, simulation results or data analysis,
Show them, but keep discussion during presentation to a minimum. Details can be
discussed later as necessary.
● Smartsheet Gantt chart should be kept current throughout the term for each project group
and include all critical tasks and major milestones.
Project Contribution Subjective
(150 points)
● Have you put forth a strong effort to complete your project within the best of your abilities?
● Have you worked with and helped your fellow group and team members to make the overall
project successful?
Project Results Subjective
(375 points)
● All parts you are responsible for have been manufactured and are on the vehicle.
● All process improvements you are responsible for have been tested and are ready to be
implemented.
● Have you met the objectives originally discussed in the project description/with team leaders?
● All parts you are responsible for have been kept in a reasonably updated state in the Part
Evaluation Sheet throughout the term (Formula members).
Winter Term Schedule
Activity / Task Week Date
Syllabus and Deadlines; Full Class Presentations Winter
Break Progress A 1 7Jan12
Full Class Presentations Winter
Break Progress B 1 9Jan12
Individual Group Meetings A 2 14Jan12
Individual Group Meetings B 2 16Jan12
MLK Holiday No
Class 3 21Jan12
Full Class Meeting: TBD 3 23Jan12
Full Class Presentations A 4 28Jan12
Full Class Presentations B 4 30Jan12
Individual Group Meetings A 5 4Feb12
Individual Group Meetings B 5 6Feb12
Full Class Presentations A 6 11Feb12
Full Class Presentations B 6 13Feb12
Individual Group Meetings A 7 18Feb12
Individual Group Meetings B 7 20Feb12
Full Class Presentations A 8 25Feb12
Full Class Presentations B 8 27Feb12
Individual Group Meetings A 9 4Mar12
Individual Group Meetings B 9 6Mar12
Full Class Presentations A 10 11Mar12
Full Class Presentations B; Final Proposal Due 10 13Mar12