SOCD51: Culture, Creativity, and Cities Capstone Course
Instructor:
Clayton Childress
cchildress@utsc.utoronto.ca OH: Tues 1-3 HL 478
TA: Taylor Price taylor.price@mail.utoronto.ca By Appointment
In this course you will be investigating the intersections of culture, creativity, and urban space. This is a hands-on D-Level course, meaning learning will be student-directed and student-centered. You can expect to engage in a wide range of research and presentation activities, including everything from serving as a weekly discussion leader, to developing a research strategy, conducting research, writing up reports, and creating an end-of-term presentation of your findings. Every week we’ll be spending the first half of the course meeting having a reading workshop, and the second half of the meeting having a project workshop.
Required Texts All required readings are available on our course Quercus page. Other resources include our course blog at culturecreativityandcities.weebly.com and course youtube page at: https://goo.gl/qkeQa4 (login & password the same as weebly). Guidelines for all of the assignments and FAQs can be found on the Quercus page.
Goals and Objectives
• Students will be able to display comprehension of major research themes at the intersection of culture, creativity, and cities.
• Students will gain first-hand, team-based experience gathering and analyzing primary and secondary data on the topic of culture, creativity and cities.
• Students will learn four techniques (group discussion leadership; blog posts; research report; research presentation) for the dissemination of academic ideas and findings.
Student Expectations
• Students will attend all scheduled meetings on time and prepared.
• Students will not falsify illness or injury to themselves, family, or friends if attendance is missed.
• Students will complete the readings assigned before class and to a level in which they would feel comfortable leading a group discussion.
• Students will not skip the reading, skim the reading, or give up on the reading if they find it initially confusing.
• Students will respect each other, and our collaborative learning environment in the course.
• Students will not plagiarize.
Instructor Expectations
In agreement and in honor of your commitment to the course, I agree to be punctual and prepared; to use my knowledge of sociology to work through the material with you; and to be forthright, timely, and helpful in my communication and feedback. I take our time together very seriously and work hard to provide opportunities within our course that will contribute to your goals, aspirations, and commitments inside and outside of UTSC.
Assignments and Grade Breakdown: Weekly Reading Quiz – 10% : Showing up is cool and all, but to receive credit for showing up you need to show up prepared. At exactly 10 minutes after the start of class there will be a two or three question quiz on the two articles assigned for that week.
Discussion Participation – 10%: Showing up prepared is cool and all, but you’re selfish with all of that preparation you’ve done and don’t share it with others, what’s the point of discussing the articles? If you’re not comfortable speaking in class, this is a good and safe space to practice. At a bare minimum you should be looking at the speaker when they talk and intellectually “present” in the room, even if you’re not speaking. A very good way to get discussion participation points is to come to class with a discussion question for the class.
Discussion Leader – 5%: Once during the term you will serve as discussion leader for one article. For the assignment hand in a copy of your notes on the article and your preparation notes for serving as discussion leader (see guidelines on the Quercus page).
Team Blog Posts –15% (5% each): Over the term you and your team members will be responsible for three blog posts on our class blog at https://culturecreativityandcities.weebly.com/. (see guidelines, video tutorial, login, and so on through the course Quercus page).
Research Brief –10%: On the last day of class you will be handing in a brief research report. These are done individually, meaning each member of a team constructs their own. (see the template for this on the Quercus page).
Team Presentation -10%: You and your team members will be giving a ten-minute research presentation which must be uploaded to our course blog by the day of the exam during exam week (see guidelines on the Quercus page).
Midterm Test –20%: In the sixth week of the course we will take a midterm reading quiz on all of the readings from the first half of the course. Quiz questions will be a mix of weekly reading questions and new questions.
Term Test –20%: The end of term reading quiz will be taken during the final exam period, and will follow the same format as the midterm reading quiz, this time only covering material from the second half of the course.
Final grades will be broken down into the following categories:
Weekly Reading Quiz
10%
Discussion Participation
5%
Discussion Leader
5%
Team Blog Posts (5% each)
15%
Team Presentation
10%
Research Brief
15%
Midterm Test
20%
Term Test
20%
Total
100%
Cellphones and Laptops in Class Cellphones should be turned off or to vibrate. You will be on the work terminals for the “workshop” half of every class. If you bring a laptop to class it should be closed during the first half of class (discussion). I have provided you with a notebook and pen to use during discussion. I will have the articles pulled up on a laptop and can check for substantive points during discussion. I have not made this decision on a whim or without thought.
In-Class Expectations “Participation” – how much you do or don’t talk, sit up or fall asleep – isn’t really what most of us want from our students. Instead, most of us hope to see students accept our invitation to “the life of mind” by adopting a “scholarly attitude.” Having a “scholarly attitude” involves developing intellectual curiosity and a genuine engagement with the ideas presented in the course. Students with a scholarly attitude take the student role seriously and demonstrate their commitment to academic pursuits by actively engaging in the material, reflecting deeply on the readings, raising thoughtful questions and comments in class, bringing unsolicited materials to share that are directly relevant to the topics being covered, come early and/or stay late to raise their own questions about the material, and generally go above and beyond the requirements of the course. Students who lack a scholarly attitude passively complete the readings and responses, occasionally engage in other activities during lecture (playing with phones, texting, daydreaming, and so on), and are primarily concerned with obtaining a particular grade in the course. Having a “scholarly attitude” is rewarded in many small and large ways.
Email
Email is an excellent and efficient form of communication for quick exchanges or the sharing of information. Anything that takes over a sentence to respond to is better discussed during office hours or before or after class. From the hours of 8:00AM to 4:00PM on Monday through Friday I will respond to emails as quickly and efficiently as I am able to. In exchange for speed of response my responses will be brief. If your question is one that is more efficiently discussed verbally I will make that recommendation.
Possible Changes to the Syllabus
Every class is a bit different. As a result, unforeseen problems may emerge and we may have to make adjustments to the syllabus as we go. Over the term the syllabus may change. Make sure you are staying up to date on our Blackboard site.
Academic Integrity
The University of Toronto is committed to academic integrity and academic dishonesty will be penalized. All of your assignments should be your own work that has not been submitted to any other class. In addition, you should cite—using any appropriate citation style—any information or idea that you obtain from any source. For further citation information see:
Using Quotations (University College Writing Centre): http://www.utoronto.ca/ucwriting/quotations.html
Citation Guide (UTSC Writing Centre): http://ctl.utsc.utoronto.ca/twc/citations
For a full description of U of T’s academic integrity definitions and procedures see: http://www.utoronto.ca/academicintegrity/academicoffenses.html
Academic Services at UTSC
I encourage students to make good use of the academic resources available on campus. For instance, the Writing Centre provides online and individual support for getting started, writing, research, reading, revising, citation guidelines, and English language development. You can view there services here: http://ctl.utsc.utoronto.ca/twc/. Check for writing workshops, clinics, drop-in hours, individual appointments, and online help. And did you know there is a Sociology librarian at UTSC? Everyone is encouraged to contact Sarah Fedko for research help. sfedko@utsc.utoronto.ca
AccessAbility Services
Students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. In particular, if you have a disability/health consideration that may require accommodations, please approach AccessAbility Services as soon as possible and keep me in the know about how this develops. AccessAbility Services staff (located in Rm SW302, Science Wing) are available by appointment to assess specific needs, provide referrals and arrange appropriate accommodations at 416-287-7560 416 or email ability@utsc.utoronto.ca. The sooner you let them know your needs, the quicker you can obtain help in achieving your learning goals in this course. The AccessAbility website is http://www.utsc.utoronto.ca/~ability/.
On Grading Curves:
Although typically not done, the professor reserves the right to curve final grades upwards or downwards based on historic averages and departmental norms.
Statement of Acknowledgement of Traditional Land
We wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto operates. For thousands of years it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and most recently, the Mississaugas of the Credit River. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous people from across Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land.
Course Schedule
Date
Reading Workshop
Project Workshop
Jan 7
N/A – Reviewing the syllabus; expectations; assigning discussion leadership; creating term project groups.
Read posts and reports from previous projects, come up with projects and begin team formation.
Jan 14
Read: Florida, R. (2003). Cities and the creative class. City & Community, 2(1), 3-19.
Read: Markusen, A. (2006). Urban development and the politics of a creative class: evidence from a study of artists. Environment and planning A, 38(10), 1921-1940. Read Through: Blog Post 1 Assignment and some prior Assignment 1s on culturecreativityandcities.weebly.com
Project and Team Assignments
Starting to Map
Jan 21 Read: Hannigan, J. (1996). From fantasy city to creative city. Tourism, creativity and development, 29, 48. (SNEHA) Read: Hollands, Robert G. (2008). Will the real smart city please stand up? Intelligent, progressive, or entrepreneurial? City 12(3): 303-320. (BERNARDO)
Finishing Mapping
Jan 28 Read: Patterson, M., & Silver, D. (2015). The place of art: Local area characteristics and arts growth in Canada, 2001–2011. Poetics, 51, 69-87. (TAMMY)
Read: Patterson, M., & Silver, D. Turning the post-industrial city into the cultural city: The case of Toronto’s waterfront. (JULIA)
Read Through: Blog Post 2 Assignment and some prior Assignment 1s on culturecreativityandcities.weebly.com
Spatial Blog Post Due
Starting Background Research
Feb 4 Read: Premdas, R. (2004). Diaspora and its discontents: A Caribbean fragment in Toronto in quest of cultural recognition and political empowerment. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 27(4), 544-564. (ZAIYAAN) Read: Grundy, J., & Boudreau, J. A. (2008). ‘Living with culture’: creative citizenship practices in Toronto. Citizenship Studies, 12(4), 347-363. (RAAGAVI)
Continuing Background Research
Feb 11 Read: Bain, A. L. (2003). Constructing contemporary artistic identities in Toronto neighbourhoods. The Canadian Geographer/Le Géographe canadien, 47(3), 303-317. (ATHIYSHAN)
Read: Rawlings, C. M. (2001). ‘Making names’: The cutting edge renewal of African art in New York City, 1985-1996. Poetics, 29(1), 25-54. (CLAYTON)
Read Through: Blog Post 3 Assignment and some prior Assignment 3s on culturecreativityandcities.weebly.com
Background Research Blog Post Due
Starting to Code
Feb 25
Midterm Test
Continuing to Code
March 3
Read: Macias, Anthony F. (2004). Bringing music to the people: race, urban culture, and municipal politics in postwar Los Angeles. American Quarterly 56.3:693-717 (SHUBHANI)
Read: Finch, Mark. 2015. ‘Toronto is the best!’: Cultural scenes, independent music, and competing urban visions. Popular Music and Society, 38(3): 299-317. (TIFFANY)
Continuing to Code
March 10
Read: Coe, Neil M. 2000. The view from out West: embeddedness, inter-personal relations and the development of an indigenous film industry in Vancouver. Geoforum 31: 391-407. (FRANK)
Read: Hracs, Brian J., Jill L. Grant, Jeffry Haggett, and Jesse Morton. 2011. A tale of two scenes: Civic capital and retaining musical talent in Toronto and Halifax. The Canadian Geographer 55(3): 365-382 (SIMRAN)
Continuing to Code
March 17
Read: Zhang, Cecilia Zhuang. 2015. Construction and reconstruction of ethnicity in retail landscapes: case studies in the Toronto area. Journal of Urban Design 20(5): 677-697. (LAZINA)
Read: Stillwagon, Ryan, and Amin Ghaziani. 2019. Queer pop-ups: A cultural innovation in urban life. City & Community 18(3): 875-895 (LINDSAY)
Read Through: Final Research Brief Guidelines and Final Group Presentation Guidelines, and look through some final research briefs and presentations on culturecreativityandcities.weebly.com
Coding Blog Post Due
Preparing Presentations/ Preparing Research Reports
March 24 Read: Patterson, M. (2016). The global city versus the city of neighborhoods: spatial practice, cognitive maps, and the aesthetics of urban conflict. City & Community, 15(2), 163-183. (KAYLEN) Read: Mees Catungal, J. P., Leslie, D., & Hii, Y. (2009). Geographies of displacement in the creative city: The case of Liberty Village, Toronto. Urban Studies, 46(5-6), 1095-1114. (CLAYTON)
Preparing Presentations/Preparing Research Reports
March 31
Term Test
Research Reports
Due (uploaded on course website)
DATE TBD
Presentations Recorded and Uploaded