Praxis I Syllabus
1. Course Overview
As the first course in the Praxis Design Sequence, Praxis I lays the foundation for future design courses in
Engineering Science. This foundation includes common terminology, models and processes, necessary skills,
and most importantly the Praxis Approach to Engineering Design Education. Key features of this approach
include:
• Encouraging students to explore and question activities and assignments;
• Exposing students to multiple conceptions of “engineering” and “design” so that students develop their
own, individualized understanding of “engineering design” that guides their practice;
• Using multiple modes of communication and design to make and defend design decisions;
• Expecting students to explore alternate perspectives and approaches to the materials presented;
• Giving students responsibility for integrating theory and practice, supported by the Teaching Team.
The Praxis Approach has as core theoretical underpinnings the Perry Model of Intellectual and Ethical
Development and the Kolb Learning Cycle. Students are encouraged to explore these models to better
understand the philosophy of the Praxis Sequence and how to succeed in the various Praxis courses.
Praxis I is divided into two sections, each of which is based on a single, multi-week project:
1. Device Design – Students work in pairs to explore and analyze the concept of “engineering design” by
investigating the key design decisions embodied in household electro-mechanical devices.
2. Product Design – Students engage in an engineering design sequence that spans framing, conceptual
design, detailed design, and design critique. Students take on the roles of entrepreneur-client and, in
multiple forms, design engineer.
The projects in Praxis I model and lay the foundation for the single, term-long project in ESC102 Praxis II.
Students engage in engineering design and practice engineering communication in other Engineering
Science 1F term courses, most notably CIV102 and CSC180. Praxis I provides students with concepts,
models, and tools that they can use both to practice engineering design and to reflect on their other design
and problem solving experiences.
2. Teaching Team
The Teaching Team in Praxis I integrates members from the Division of Engineering Science and the
Engineering Communication Program (ECP). Lectures will be given primarily by the Course Instructors,
while teams of Studio Instructors and Teaching Assistants will facilitate the studios.
Course Instructors
Jason Foster (Course Coordinator)
jason.foster@utoronto.ca
Rob Irish
r.irish@utoronto.ca
Studio Instructors Teaching Assistants
Brendan Bowles
brendan.bowles@utoronto.ca
James Bateman (1T3 ΝΨ Physics)
james.bateman@mail.utoronto.ca
Penny Kinnear
penny.kinnear@utoronto.ca
Andrew Flood (0T7 + PEY ΝΨ Physics)
andrew.flood@mail.utoronto.ca
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Studio Instructors Teaching Assistants
Jenny Lofgreen
j.lofgreen@utoronto.ca
Richard Gao (1T3 + PEY ΝΨ Biomedical)
r.gao@mail.utoronto.ca
Ted Nolan
emartin.nolan@utoronto.ca
Vicki Komisar (0T9 ΝΨ Biomedical)
v.komisar@utoronto.ca
Farzan Sasangohar
f.sasangohar@mail.utoronto.ca
Ante Lausic (1T0 ΝΨ Nanoengineering)
ante.lausic@utoronto.ca
Neil Shyminsky
N.shyminsky@utoronto.ca
Patricia Sheridan (0T9 Mechanical Engineering)
patricia.sheridan@utoronto.ca
Rene Rail-Ip (1T1 + PEY ΝΨ ECE)
rene.rail.ip@mail.utoronto.ca
Office hours with the Teaching Team are by appointment on a “first-contact, first-scheduled” basis.
3. Assignments and Distribution of Grades
The studio activities and assignments are designed to support and document work on the two course
projects. In addition to assignments that relate directly to each of these projects, students are expected to
continue to develop their independent learning and reflective skills throughout the term.
Project Due Date Deliverable Weight Submitter
Device Design 2013-10-07 @ 0900 Device Design Report 15% Individual
Product Design
Multiple Design Brief 10% Team
Multiple Conceptual Design 25% Team
Studio 11 + 2 days @ 2400 Detailed Design 5% Individual
Non-Project
Deliverables
Continuous with timerestricted
scaffolding
Design Portfolio
Publicly accessible web site (or equivalent)
20% Individual
TBD
(Likely 2013-12-06 or 2013-12-09)
Final Examination 25% Individual
Students should be adding to, or revising, their Design Portfolio regularly throughout Praxis I. A number of
targeted, time-restricted scaffolds will be provided during the term to help students develop content for their
Portfolio. At any point during the term the Teaching Team may view a Portfolio and provide feedback to its
author. The Design Portfolio deliverable must be completed by 2013-12-04 @ 2400.
3.1. Final Examination
The Final Examination for ESC101 will likely take place on either Friday, December 6th, 2013 or on Monday,
December 9th, 2013. The exam will be written online and will have three questions, weighted unequally, that
focus on:
1. Framing and Requirements
2. Implementing “Design for X”
3. Critical Self-Reflection
Student will have access to their Design Portfolio, and those of their classmates, during the exam. Additional
details on the Final Exam will be released during the term.
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Syllabus rev. 1.0 [2/7]
4. Resources
4.1. Hardcopy Resources
Irish, R. and Weiss, P., Engineering Communication From Principles to Practice, 2nd Edition, Oxford
University Press, 2013.
This textbook is organized around 18 principles for effective engineering communication. In Praxis I the
focus will be on principles 1,3-8, and 10. Other principles will be covered in Praxis II and beyond.
4.2. Electronic Resources
Blackboard: available through https://portal.utoronto.ca
Course Downloads: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/courses/esc101/20139/
Twitter Feed: follow username EngSciPraxis and hashtag #esc101
Tickets: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/tickets
Surveys: https://design.engsci.utoronto.ca/surveys
Realtime Communication: ircs://design.engsci.utoronto.ca:6667
5. Activities and Workload
5.1. Lectures (3 scheduled hours per week)
Monday 1400-1500 • Tuesday 1300-1400 • Friday 1300-1400
Lectures take place in MC102 and introduce the concepts required to successfully complete the course,
examples of how those concepts can be and have been applied, and connections among materials sourced
from both within and outside of Praxis I.
5.2. Design Studios (“Tutorial”; 2 scheduled hours per week)
Studios provide weekly, focused, and incremental activities that support the Praxis I projects. Students work
both individually and in teams to meet Studio-specific learning objectives and have Studio-specific
experiences. Active participation in Studio is essential to student success in the Praxis Sequence.
Week No. Major Studio Activities
2013-09-09 01 Reflecting and Defining
2013-09-16 02 Destroying and Understanding I
2013-09-23 03 Researching and Exploring I
2013-09-30 04 Destroying and Understanding II
2013-10-07 05 Teaming and Valuing
2013-10-14 06 Finding and Framing
2013-10-21 07 Pitching and Picking
2013-10-28 08 Reframing and Diverging
2013-11-04 09 Converging and Selecting
2013-11-11 10 Modeling and Prototyping
2013-11-18 11 Researching and Exploring II
2013-11-25 12 Defending and Critiquing
2013-12-01 No studios are scheduled so that you have more
time to prepare for the Final Exam
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Syllabus rev. 1.0 [3/7]
5.3. Workload
Students are expected to spend on average one hour outside of class for every one hour of classroom time
(e.g. 5 hours per week per student). This workload may not be distributed evenly across the term.
6. Graduate Attributes and Learning Objectives
Having completed Praxis I, all students are expected to have started on the path to possessing the abilities
and understandings linked to the following Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board graduate attributes1:
3.1.3 Investigation
3.1.4 Design
3.1.5 Engineering tools
3.1.6 Teamwork
3.1.7 Communication skills
3.1.8 Professionalism
3.1.10 Ethics and equity
3.1.11 Economics and project management
3.1.12 Lifelong Learning
Having completed Praxis I, all students are expected to be able to:
1. Develop a personal theory of engineering design that is congruent to that of the
Engineering profession
a. Locate and explore accepted definitions of, approaches to, and theories of “engineering design”;
b. Develop a personal conception of and approach to “engineering design” that is congruent with that of
the Engineering profession;
c. Practice “engineering design” both within and outside of the classroom; and,
d. Reflect on their design activities and refine their conception and approach.
2. Practice engineering design as an individual and as part of a team
a. Critique existing engineering designs from the perspective of design decisions and consequences;
b. Characterize problems and appropriately frame them as engineering problems;
c. Structure and analyze a team design activity using a variety of formal models;
d. Use multiple, formal methods to generate design alternatives and select among candidate designs;
e. Transition a design between different scales and types of refinement; and,
f. Reflect upon and learn from both their and other’s successful and failed designs.
3. Express engineering designs and ideas
a. Select appropriate modes of communication (oral, written, graphical) to best express an idea for an
audience;
b. Structure information to credibly communicate engineering knowledge; and,
c. Support design ideas with research, analysis, and prior design.
4. Make engineering arguments
a. Analyze an audience and tailor an argument accordingly;
b. Frame an argument in a manner accepted by the engineering community; and,
c. Adapt modes of argument to meet a need.
7. Grading Policies
7.1. Grade Expectations
Obtaining an “A” grade in Praxis requires demonstrating strong evidence of original thinking. Students who
submit work that delivers no more than what is required, regardless of the depth to which those
requirements are satisfied, are in essence showing only “evidence of grasp of subject matter”. Accordingly
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Syllabus rev. 1.0 [4/7]
1 Further information on the CEAB Graduate Attributes can be found at:
http://www.engineerscanada.ca/e/files/Accreditation_Criteria_Procedures_2010.pdf
they can expect a maximum grade of a “B”. Obtaining an “A” requires that students demonstrate that
they have engaged in original thought and have explored aspects of the material and assignment
that were not explicitly required, but that are relevant to the objectives of the assignment and
the course.
Note that an “A” grade will not be awarded to a submission where the required elements are either missing
or accomplished at an unsatisfactory level, regardless of whether additional work or original thought has
been demonstrated.
7.2. Grade Discussions
Students are encouraged to discuss their work, both before and after it has been graded, with their Studio
Instructors and, if necessary, with the Course Instructors. In any conversation involving grades,
students must be prepared to present a cogent argument supported by evidence. Should an
assignment be regraded, the new grade may be lower, the same, or higher than the initial grade.
7.3. Team Grades
When working in teams, students are expected to divide workload equitably. The nature of the division is up
to the team members, and does not require that all members work the same hours or produce identical
volumes of work. By default all team members receive an identical grade on team assignments. Students
should report any difficulties in their teams to a member of the Teaching Team as early as
possible so that the difficulties can be addressed in a positive way. Students should also maintain as
complete a record of team interactions as possible2. Based on solicited, confidential feedback, the
Course Instructors may adjust the grade distribution within a team.
7.4. Late Penalties
Due dates have been selected such that course workload is spread out over the term and that sufficient time
is available to provide formative feedback prior to the submission of summative assignments. Assignments
that are submitted late will be subject to a cumulative penalty, as outlined in the respective assignment
descriptions. Note that this practice deviates from the more common industry practice of not accepting late
deliverables.
7.5. Support and Accommodation
Students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. Students who have a disability
or health consideration that may require accommodations are both encouraged and welcome to approach the
Course Instructors as soon as possible. Should accommodations be necessary, by University of
Toronto policy students are required to contact the Accessibility Services Office.
8. Policies
Engineering Science Students are expected to comport themselves professionally and to exercise common
sense3. They are also expected to be familiar with, and act according to, University policies, guidelines, and
interpretations. Of particular importance are those mentioned in the “Academic Regulation” section of the
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering Academic Calendar.
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Syllabus rev. 1.0 [5/7]
2 This includes, but it not limited to, copies of emails, text messages, chat logs, phone calls, etc.
3 Students are encouraged to consult with the Teaching Team if they are uncertain whether an activity or
decision would be unprofessional or would indicate a lack of common sense.
8.1. Plagiarism
The University of Toronto treats plagiarism as a violation of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
Plagiarism is a serious forms of cheating in which a student makes use of someone else’s ideas or words
without giving appropriate attribution. In your academic work, plagiarism usually occurs in one of three
ways:
• You cut and paste a piece of someone else’s text or code or figure but do not clearly show what the source
is for that material.
• You hand in work done by others (e.g. teammates) without putting their names on the work.
• You rephrase someone else’s idea into your own words, but do not give credit to the source of the idea.
The University takes cheating very seriously. Penalties can include zero on the assignment, zero in the
course, annotations on your transcript (which would be seen by a potential graduate school or employer), or
in extreme cases expulsion from the University. If you are concerned about your use of sources,
discuss your concerns with your Studio Instructor or a Course Instructor before submitting a
document for assessment.
8.2. Instructional Materials and Copyright
Students are prohibited from recording or otherwise reproducing any copyrighted materials associated with
this course unless they obtain prior permission from the copyright holder. Note that all lectures are
copyright of the lecturers.
8.3. English Proficiency Requirement
The Engineering Faculty’s English Proficiency Requirement is as follows:
The Faculty requires each student to show an ability to write English coherently and
correctly in all written work submitted for evaluation. Consequently, the Faculty reserves
the right to ask each student to write a post-admission English Proficiency Assessment at
the beginning of his or her first year of studies. Every student will also take at least one
course that includes a written communication component within their curriculum.
Satisfactory completion of the course or courses is required for graduation.
(Calendar, FASE, 2013-2014, Academic Regulations VI.3.)
In Engineering Science, successful completion of the written components of Praxis I should demonstrate
such proficiency. All written components will be considered as contributing to demonstrating proficiency;
however, most weight will be assigned to closely supervised writing activities. Students who fail to
demonstrate English proficiency in Praxis I will be asked to take specific steps in Praxis II aimed to improve
their English proficiency.
8.4. Public Disclosure
Students agree that by taking this course all submitted deliverables may be used for teaching and learning
purposes, in this or subsequent courses, or to support research into improving engineering education. Any
such use will confirm to the Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans.
Students who are concerned about the intellectual property ramifications of potential disclosure
must notify the Course Instructors prior to the end of the 20139 academic session. Students who
have questions about the University of Toronto Inventions Policy should inquire with the Course Instructors
8.5. Turnitin
Students agree that by taking this course all required papers may be subject to submission for textual
similarity review to Turnitin.com for the detection of plagiarism. All submitted papers will be included as
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Syllabus rev. 1.0 [6/7]
source documents in the Turnitin.com reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of
such papers. The terms that apply to the University's use of the Turnitin.com service are described on the
Turnitin.com web site. The intellectual property of all students submitting to Turnitin.com is protected by
the licensing agreement between the University of Toronto and iParadigms. This agreement further ensures
that student papers submitted to Turnitin.com will not be used for commercial purposes.
8.6. Course Feedback
Over the course of the term, students may be requested to provide feedback on the course. This feedback
may be solicited by the Division of Engineering Science or the Course Instructors. Any such feedback will be
used to improve the course, during both this and future sessions. While students are not required to respond
to the requests for feedback, they are encouraged to do so as their feedback can significantly improve both
their course experience and that of future students. Should feedback be requested, student anonymity will be
preserved unless the student explicitly chooses to share their identity with the Course Instructors.
ESC101 – Praxis I – 20139
Syllabus rev. 1.0 [7/7]